Kalm
Rear Tower (Pagoda)
Inn: 1f
Inn: 2f
CLOUD's Past
Received "Peacemaker"!
Received "Guard Source"!
…Dropped "Megalixir"!
Received "Underwater" Materia!
Received "Master Magic" Materia!
Received "Master Command" Materia!
Received "Master Summon" Materia!
Empty…
Can't reach it…
This is Kalm.
We've reached Kalm.
So this is Kalm?
…this must be Kalm.
Yo, I'll be waitin' at the inn… Hurry and get your butt over there!
I wonder if everyone's there already? Let's hurry over to the inn!
Everyone's waiting at the inn. Let's go CLOUD.
We're supposed to meet at the inn. …Shall we go?
Get over here!
Well then, I'll go on ahead.
Let's go CLOUD.
Let's go CLOUD.
Thanks to the Mako energy Shinra, Inc. develops for us, everything's more convenient now.
Maybe a little too convenient.
I hear that the natural resources near the reactors are being sucked dry.
We're better off with the Mako energy.
The famous floating city, Midgar… Just once I'd love to see it in person.
What does it do? It checks the pressure of the Mako energy sent from Midgar.
This is the Item Store.
This is the Weapons Store.
This is the Materia Store.
I heard terrorists bombed a Midgar reactor…
There have been a lot of dangerous accidents recently. I hate it, just hate it.
It seems there was this group called AVALANCHE runnin' around, but I guess SOLDIER finally wiped them out.
Shinra is trying to eliminate anyone, who stands up to them.
It don't matter if we like it or not. Shinra's taken over, and we gotta live with it!
Stay out of the kitchen.
I heard President Shinra was killed. And his son Rufus, the new president, was badly hurt.
Hey, I bet that's news to you?
You're pretty smart!
Heh, heh…Just between us… I heard it was them Ava-whaddya call-ums that got President Shinra and his son.
Don't care? If you're going to travel, you'd best keep an eye on what Shinra's doing.
When I grow up I'm gonna be in SOLDIER. That's why I'm training hard now!!
My older brother's so stupid. He's so embarrassing I could just puke!
Hyah, hayah, eagghh!
Hyah, hayah, eagghh!
Hyah, hayah, eagghh!
Thanks to Mako energy, life's pretty darn convenient. Thanks to Shinra.
Don't you think?
Yeah, maybe
You're full of it
See!? How would we get by without Mako energy?
Hmm. But I'd hate to think of what life'd be like without Mako energy.
Mako energy's made things a lot more convenient…
But a lot of plants and animals have been disappearing at a rapid pace.
I think the old life was better.
Don't you think so?
Yeah, sure I'm right! You think so, don't you?
That's just what my mom said.
Things were better when you could play with animals…
Listen to me! Something really big's happening in Midgar.
They were just saying on TV it was Rufus' second strategy and…
That big cannon's pointed due north… Do you think the target is Sephiroth?
Everyone at Shinra's in an uproar because they heard Weapon's coming.
I heard a big hydroplane carrying secret weapons, was attacked by Weapon and was sunk at sea…
If something ever happened to President Rufus, That'd be the end of Shinra, Inc. and the rest of the world, too.
Did you say you came from Midgar?
I used to live there, too. But I heard they got lots of troubles lately.
Is it true that Shinra makes monsters?
It's true
Just a rumor
Yeah, well either way, as long as we use reactors, we can't stand up to Shinra.
There was a suspicious-looking man in a black cloak! He was carrying a mean-looking sword.
They say Midgar's in the middle of a war between the Shinra and some terrorists called AVALANCHE.
20 gil a night. What's it gonna be?
Mr…CLOUD? Your party is waiting for you on the 2nd floor.
Shinra's leading the world around by the nose, and you guys are just gonna sit back and take it?
Me? I used to work in a mine down south called Mythril Mine
But, awhile back, monsters started appearing.
After that, business went to pot and now I spend the days here drinking.
Urrrp!…hic… I'm stinking drunk!!
Seems like you're a little short. Why don't you drop by again… when you have money.
Why doesn't anyone believe me? I'm so lonely…
Listen to me! Just now, some guy in a black cloak walked east towards that grassy field.
He's got this killer sword, and looks REAL scary…
Aw, c'mon! Listen to me!
Got anything interesting to say?
Locked. Can't open it…
I gotta hurry up and get strong so I can crush Meteor to bits! But I gotta train real hard to do it.
Oh man, oh man! Meteor's gonna fall on us, and now some huge monster like I've never seen is wandering around out there!
What's going to happen to all of us?
I want you to stop that talk about Meteor falling on us!
Listen, I work hard…and now you're tellin' me Meteor's gonna smash everything to bits?
Well, I ain't standin' around listenin' to fool talk like this. Makes a person lose the will to work, that's what it does!
What're ya, dense? Something like that'll never happen! It's ridiculous!
And all of Midgar's gonna be destroyed by a falling meteor? Oh, don't make me laugh!
I heard the remaining members of AVALANCHE smashed the Shinra troops at Midgar.
They say the remaining members of AVALANCHE broke Shinra's resistance and destroyed the Mako cannon at Midgar.
What's going to happen to the world?
I heard Shinra's taking it's biggest artillery from Junon and other facilities and gathering it in Midgar to fight Meteor and Weapon.
Even if Meteor falls, you ought to be safe as long as you're in Midgar.
They say it's a "Mako Metropolis" so it will survive.
Ah, youth… You really believe that big meteor filling up the sky is going to fall?
If that's the case then all we can do is put our hope in Shinra, Inc.
If Shinra, Inc. was our last hope, and they've been beaten by terrorists… Are we all going to die?
Meteor's going to fall, isn't it? Then we're all history unless Shinra does something about it!
Why're you checking the Mako energy pressure at a time like this? It's probably already too late.
You can't go into a tail spin at a time like this. You've got to keep living just like before. At least that's what I think…
They say Meteor's going to fall, but that's okay! I'm sure Shinra'll come through for us in the end!
Dear, can you believe it? They say that Shinra's gone under!!
This world is coming to an end all because some terrorists called AVALANCHE stuck their noses in the wrong place!
I can't believe Meteor's really falling this way… What's going to happen to us?
Meteor's coming, right? Where will I stash my money? Wait, maybe I'd better take it with me and get out of here!
One night, 300 gil. Wanna check in?
Tourists, huh? Here are a few things you should know that will come in handy when you travel around the world…
Want to hear what they are?
Then let me explain how to use the world map.
Well then, what do you want to know?
Changing camera angles
Map indicators
Operating the buttons
Anything else you'd like to know?
Nope, I got it
First press [CAMERA] to change the camera angle.
There are 2 angles to choose from, select the one you like.
Then rotate the camera either way by pressing [PAGEUP] or [PAGEDOWN].
Try different angles until you find the one you like best. It makes the journey a lot more fun!
Press [START] once to view the World Map.
There is a large and small map. Learn when to use which and you won't get lost.
Push [START] twice to change the size of the map, and once more to turn it off. Pretty easy, huh?
Ride things by pressing [ASSIST] and get off by pressing [CANCEL]. This isn't so hard, either!
Oh, right. You can't dash on the World Map, so make sure not to press [CANCEL] unless you want to get off.
Remember this because Chocobos will run away as soon as you get off them, so be careful.
Once on the World Map you can access the menu to save your game anywhere. It's a good idea to save frequently!
Well then, bon voyage!
Is that so? Well, that's that. Have a nice trip.
Damn!!
Oh! You!!
…don't mess with me!!
Huh? You're looking for your friend? You want to know where the Lifestream is?
Hmm, I can't help you find your friend, but I've heard about the Lifestream.
When I traveled to the Southern islands, a doctor was very kind to me. I seem to recall him telling me something about the Lifestream…
Hey, listen to me! The Shinra troops are on the move.
The TV news said Rufus came up with two plans. One, is to launch a rocket into space containing Huge Materia…
Is Huge Materia really that destructive?
Sephiroth put up a huge barrier around the North Crater.
Rufus wants to use a mammoth cannon to smash the barrier.
He plans to have Shinra troops rush in and attack Sephiroth after the barrier falls.
The North Crater barrier's been demolished?
So now's the time to defeat Sephiroth.
Hey, listen to me! I heard the barrier protecting Sephiroth is gone!
But with Rufus dead, the Shinra troops don't know what to do. Heidegger and Scarlet don't have what it takes to lead the troops.
I really thought something was finally going to happen, but everything's the same… Not a damn thing changes around here!
My old man was a miner, but he couldn't go to work after monsters started appearing in the Mythril Mines.
Now all he does is sit around getting drunk in the bar…
My dad still just sits at the bar drinking, even though he knows Meteor's coming!
It's sad. Even though he's an adult, he just doesn't want to see the world as it really is. I dunno what to do.
South of this town past the Mythril Mine and far to the west is a Shinra harbor called Junon.
They say there's a reactor and many tall buildings there. I hope to see it someday.
The world's at peace… all's well.
Tomorrow's another day… all's well.
I got my health, and enough to eat… all's well.
The world's changed a lot in the past few days…
That huge Meteor is covering up the sky and acting like it owned it.
A lot of my friends have died…
I'm goin' on a journey to pray for their souls.
A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"
I wonder if there's anyone who'll bring it to me?
Now if I can just get the "Guidebook", I can start my journey…
Now if I can just get "Desert Rose", I can stary my journey…
Now if I can just get "Earth Harp", I can start my journey…
"Guidebook" and "Desert Rose"… Will you guys look for them for me?
"Guidebook" and "Earth Harp"… Will you guys look for them for me?
"Desert Rose" and "Earth Harp"… Will you guys look for them for me?
OH! It's "Guidebook"! Wanna trade it for this Underwater Materia?
How about it?
Trade
Don't trade
OH! It's "Desert Rose"! Wanna trade it for that Chocobo over there?
OH! It's the Earth Harp! Wanna trade it for some Master Materia?
I'm not bein' stingy either! I'll give you all three of 'em!
Ok then, it's a done deal!
I dunno…
it's Underwater Materia. Go on, it's yours!
It's a Chocobo. Take it, it's yours!
It's a 3-piece Master Materia set, …and it's all yours!
I guess it's time to go on a journey for the souls of my departed friends…
Looks like my Stable's full. I'll come back when I have room.