Wark!
Wark? Warkwark wark?
Wark
Warrrk
Wark--
Wark!! Wark!!
Received "Choco/Mog" Materia!
They tried to give you something but you couldn't get it.
Chocobo farm
Received "Chocobo Lure" Materia!
Choco Bill
Thinking of crossing the marshes?
Hmm, then it'll probably be safer for you to get a Chocobo.
That way you can zip through the marshes with the Chocobo.
It's the only way to avoid being attacked by the Midgar Zolom.
Midgar Zolom…?
It's a serpent-like creature over 30 feet tall!!
It detects the footsteps of anyone in the marshes.
And then, BAM!! It attacks!!!
To avoid that, buy a Chocobo at me and Choco Billy's Chocobo Farm.
To purchase a Chocobo, please talk to my grandson. He's in the Chocobo stables at the far right end of the farm.
By the way, there was another person heading towards the Marshes.
Without a Chocobo, the Midgar Zolom probably got him. It was a man in a black cape.
Welcome.
How 'bout a Chocobo Lure Materia?
Each level it increases, makes it easier for you to find a Chocobo.
Hmm, then, I guess that's that.
Still want to cross the Marshes?
No
Looking for an Inn?
Nope
How about 100 gil a night…?
I'm in a hurry
Thank you for your patronage.
… Ummm, you don't have enough…
Please    for a second.
Chocobo farm
Oh, what is that?
What has this world come to? Stars falling, what's next?
With things the way they are now, how 'bout raising a Chocobo?
No, I'm not trying to persuade you for money. It's just because of the way things are in the world.
I thought that it would be a healthy thing for you to raise some Chocobos…
Hmm…You just happen to be in luck!
It just so happens that we aren't taking care of any Chocobos for anyone else, so…
I could take care of 6 Chocobos right now, for 10000 gil per Chocobo. How 'bout it?
Take care of my Chocobos
Tell me something else
How do you raise them?
Could you take care of the Chocobos?
I'd like to hear about something else
Tell me how you raise them
That's all
Take care of my Chocobos
I wanna hear about something else
How do ya raise 'em?
That's enough
To raise a Chocobo, you'll need a Chocobo Stable'.
And they rent for 10000 gil. Currently, I can rent out up to 6 Chocobo Stables'.
If you rent a 'Chocobo Stable', we will keep up to 4 of the Chocobos you catch in the fenced area outside.
At a later date, you can select the Chocobo that you would like to put in your Chocobo Stable'.
'Chocobo Stables' cost 10000 gil…
Rent it
We don't have enough room to rent out more than 6 here…
Thank you.
My grandson takes care of the Chocobos. He's in the Chocobo Stable at the far right of the farm. Please tell him what you want.
Someone once told me there is a Chocobo Sage'…somewhere.
He seems to know how to raise some great Chocobos.
If he really does exist, I'd like to meet him someday.
Chocobos aren't hard to take care of.
The day-to-day care will all be done here.
But, please buy the food for the Chocobo, and feed them yourselves.
Chocobo's abilities will differ with what you feed it, so feel free to choose your own food.
Also, if you're able to find a male and a female Chocobo that like each other, they'll produce an egg. But only if you feed them a 'Nut'.
New Chocobos inherit the abilities of their parents.
I've heard that sometimes new breeds of Chocobo are born with special abilities. I've never actually seen it before, though.
Chole
Wasn't it really expensive?
But don't be mad at my brother or Grandpa.
Ever since Mom and Dad died, it's been like this…
Welcome! Here's some good advice.
The white Chocobo likes it when you scratch behind its ears.
But if you scratch it someplace that it doesn't like, it'll get mad, so be careful.
Choco Billy
Do you want a Chocobo?
Mmm…
Give me one
You old folks are out of luck!
Old folks…?
Oh, I'm so glad!
We're all out of Chocobos. I'm taking care of the ones out there for someone else.
You know, if you really want a Chocobo, you should go out and catch one.
Want to know how to catch a Chocobo?
Where are they?
How do I catch one?
What else?
You see those claw prints out there? Wild Chocobo's will appear in those areas.
But, if you don't have 'Chocobo Lure' they won't come out. They're very cautious by nature.
Chocobo Lure?
Go on
'Chocobo Lure' is a type of Materia which attracts Chocobos.
If you equip this, they'll come to you. But, without it, they won't appear.
A wild Chocobo always appears with other monsters.
But, you won't be able to catch it because of the monsters.
That is why you must defeat the monsters first before you catch the Chocobo.
And then?
Wild Chocobos are really cautious. They'll run away from the smallest things.
But, if you use 'Greens' they'll focus on them and won't run away.
Whatever you do, don't make Chocobos angry. They're usually calm, but if you get them angry, you'll get hurt.
Oh, and remember, once you get off a Chocobo, it'll escape.
Well then, shall we get down to business?
I'll sell you the 'Chocobo Lure' for 2000 gil, right now.
You want it?
Buy it
Thanks!
Hey, you don't have enough.
Mmmm, if you don't have it, you'll never catch one.
The 'Chocobo Lure' is 2000 gil. Buy it now?
It wouldn't hurt to buy some 'Greens', either.
Oh, and how fast a Chocobo'll finish eating depends on what type of 'Greens' you feed them.
Chocobo Ranch
Welcome!
Buy
Get some information
Moving Chocobos
Feeding Chocobos
Mating Chocobos
Releasing Chocobos
Riding Chocobos
Do nothing
You can't take that many out at once.
You must return the Chocobo that's out, if you want to take out a different one.
Which one are you going to take?
Ride this one?
Whoa!
You have all the 'Chocobo Stables' you can carry.
If you want to put a Chocobo in it, first, you must let it go and open a 'Chocobo Stable.'
You don't even have any 'Chocobo Stables'
If you want to raise Chocobos, go talk to Grandpa.
It looks like you haven't even caught one yet…
Which one are you going to put in the 'Chocobo Stable'?
Use the Directional button left or right and [OK].
This…is a wonderful Chocobo!
This is a great Chocobo.
Mmm, this seems like a good Chocobo.
This Chocobo's so-so.
This is a pretty average Chocobo.
Mmm, this one's not bad.
This one doesn't seem to be very good.
I really can't recommend this one.
Want to put this Chocobo in your stable?
Put it in
Let it go
Choose a different one
Then, give Chocobo Ç#& a name.
I'm really going to let him go.
In order for the Chocobo to mate, you need a male and a female…
In order for them to mate, you need 'Nuts' too.
You don't have any 'Greens'… It just so happens I can sell you one…
Feed?
Mating?
Chocobo by the fence?
Ride it outside?
What are "Classes"?
Yeah, you can ride this one.
And even if you take it outside, this Chocobo won't run away when you get off of it.
If you want to return it to your 'Chocobo Stable', just ride it onto the farm.
Then, you'll be able to feed it again.
What the Chocobo eats are 'Greens'. The most famous one is the 'Gizzard Greens'.
Chocobos will mature differently depending on which 'Greens' they eat. Certain 'Greens' will boost their stamina.
You'll have to figure out which kinds have what effects for yourselves.
Oh, and Chocobos are born with certain natural abilities. So, no matter how much they mature, they can't get more abilities than what they're born with.
If a Chocobo's abilities don't increase even when you feed it, that means it's reached its limit.
It's best to let those kinds of Chocobo go or mate them to get a new Chocobo.
A male and a female Chocobo together can produce an egg.
The Chocobo out there is part of the stock that you caught.
We can only keep 4 Chocobos here at once. If you get a fifth one, the first one will have to be let go.
If you don't want that to happen, come back and put it in your own stable.
Chocobos' strengths are divided by 'Class'.
Which Chocobo are you going to let go?
There's still lots of room to grow.
It might mature a bit more.
Don't expect it to mature anymore.
Class
Your 'Chocobo Stable' is empty.
Is it all right to let this one go?
Go ahead
Gizzard Greens =
Karaka Greens =
Tantal Greens =
Pasana Greens =
Kurie Greens =
Memit Greens =
Reagan Greens =
Sylkis Greens =
Don't feed it
Looks like you don't have any 'Nuts'… To get them to produce an egg, you need a 'Nut'. Do you want to buy some?
You better have a 'Chocobo Stable' prepared for the little ones, too.
I can't give you anything I don't have.
Which 'Nut' are you going to give 'em?
Which Chocobo are you going to feed it to?
Is this all right?
Give it a different Nut
Quit
Pipio Nut =
Ruchin Nut =
Saraha Nut =
Lasan Nut =
Param Nut =
Porofu Nut =
Carob Nut =
Zeio Nut =
They gotta be male and female.
Which two Chocobos are you going to mate? Talk to the two you like and make your decision.
This one
Never mind
There's only one…
So let's mate these two.
No, I changed my mind
Speed Plus!
Stamina Plus!
Intelligence Plus!
They're getting along better!
Their personalities improved!
No improvement…
You got yourself a new Chocobo!
Looks like it's got good speed.
Looks like it's got good stamina.
Looks intelligent.
Too much energy?
You shouldn't mate those that just mated or those that were just born.
There doesn't seem to be any others you could mate it with.
Hey, do you know what a Chocobo Sage is?
What!? You've actually met him!?
Wow! What did he tell you?
Wow, that's amazing! …Let me take some notes.
Hey, did you ever see the Chocobo Sage again? What did he tell you?
Let me jot this down
Chole's Chocobo inspection
For telling me that story, I'll tell you about each Chocobo's abilities.
I think it's `$& .
That's `$& 
From what I see, the fastest sprinter is…
And, the fastest one is…
Also, from what I can tell, the one with the most stamina is…
Finally, the most intelligent one is…
There are no Chocobos.
Hey, there's only one Chocobo.
Chole's Memo #1
Other than regular Chocobo, there are Mountain Chocobo' and 'River-Chocobo'.
Chole's Memo #2
In order for the 'Mountain Chocobo' and River Chocobo' to be born, Feed the 'Carob Nut' to a 'Great Chocobo' or a 'Good Chocobo' and have it produce an egg. But we don't sell any Carob Nuts'.
Chole's Memo #3
A 'Great Chocobo' and a 'Good Chocobo' are found… on an island southeast of the Chocobo Sage's dwelling at Corel and in the area west of Corel. The 'Carob Nut' can be found south of the Chocobo Sage's dwelling. Monsters carry them. Let's see, is Bone Village just south of there?
Chole's Memo #4
One surprise: If you get the "Mountain Chocobo" and the "River Chocobo" to produce an egg, You'll get a Chocobo that can cross mountains and rivers. I bet that the right nut for that is the "Carob Nut."
Chole's Memo #5
Bigger surprise: There seems to be a Chocobo that can cross the ocean. If you could cross the ocean, mountains, and rivers, there'd be no place you couldn't go.
Chole's Memo #6
In order to get an Ocean Chocobo you need to get a Mountain-and-River Chocobo to mate with something else.
Chole's Memo #7
If you mate the Mountain-and-River Chocobo with a 'Wonderful Chocobo', you'll get an Ocean Chocobo.   But to do that you can't use an ordinary Nut.
Chole's Memo #8
The 'Nut' that produces Ocean Chocobos is the 'Zeio Nut'. This is the first I've ever heard of it. I wonder where you get them?
Chole's Memo #9
Zeio Nuts are found on a little island east of the Chocobo Sage. Goblins' have them. With this, you can produce an 'Ocean Chocobo'.
Chole's Memo #10
According to my research, Mountain, River, and Ocean Chocobos are hard to produce. But, if you take the right care of the Chocobo and increase their Class ranking by winning at the races, it'll increase your chances of getting one.