Marshes
Did Sephiroth… do this?
Amazing…
Our enemy is someone that could do this?
This Sephiroth guy's pretty strong, I'd say.
It's a power that we should respect…
Geeeeez, Louise!
Mythril Mine
Received "Tent"!
Received "Long Range" Materia!
Hey CLOUD. If we keep going, we'll never get to Kalm.
If we continue this way, we'll get farther and farther away from Kalm.
Hey, CLOUD. Wasn't Kalm right before this cavern?
…We won't get to Kalm if we go through these caverns.
Yo, wassup? Can't SOLDIER-man even lead the way?
CLOUD! Are you lost!?
Kalm should be closer to Midgar.
If we're planning to meet at Kalm, we should go back and look again.
…
Do you know who I am?
The Turks, right?
…I'm from the Turks. And don't you forget it.
Well if you know, then this won't take long.
It's difficult to explain what the Turks do…
Kidnapping, right?
To put it negatively… you could say that.
…But, that's not all there is to it anymore.
Elena
It's all right, Rude! I know you don't like speeches, so don't force it!
Then explain, Elena.
I'm the newest member of the Turks, Elena. Thanks to what you did to Reno, we're short-handed.
…But, because of that, I got promoted to the Turks…
Anyhow, our job is to find out where Sephiroth is headed.
And to try and stop you every step of the way.
Wait a minute, it's the other way around… You're the ones that are getting in our way.
…Elena. You talk too much.
Sorry…Tseng.
I thought I gave your orders.
Now go. Don't forget to file your report.
…Reno said he wanted to see you after the injuries you gave him healed.
He wants to show his affection for you all… with a new weapon.
Where's AERIS? Isn't she with you?
Oh… Then give her my regards.
AERIS… Long time no see.
Looks like you're safe from the Shinra for a while, now that Sephiroth reappeared.
What are you saying? That I should be grateful to Sephiroth?
I won't be seeing much of you, so take care.
Well then, stay out of Shinra's way.
AERIS isn't with us. She's with the others.
Wh, who are you!?
By any chance, are you…?
Who are you?
… I hoped I'd never see you again…
Sir!
Mr. Tseng!?
No need to tell them about our orders.
Rude/Elena
Yes sir!
…Strange, hearing that from you.
Oh! Right!
…Elena. You don't seem to understand.
Oh!> I'm, I'm sorry…
…Go. Don't let Sephiroth get away.
Very well, Rude and I will go after Sephiroth, who's heading for Junon Harbor!
Base of Fort Condor
We've been fighting the Shinra on this battlefield for a long time.
We've still settled in for a long war with them.
Could you spare some time, and help us fight them?
We don't want to sound pushy, so if you're busy with something, why don't you finish that first?
Where is Junon?
We'll help you
Like to help but…
I'm sorry…really
All right, we'll help
Let's see…head north along the coast, keep going a ways and you'll run into Junon.
But be alert because it sits in the shadows of a small hill.
All right then… Take care of yourselves…
Really!? Then go on up and they'll fill you in on the details.
Entrance to Fort Condor
What happened?
Where are all the villagers?
God! What the hell happened here!?
He's still alive.
Where is everybody?
Where are we?
Oh good, they're still alive.
Oy! What on earth happened?
It seems we survived.
You mean to tell me we're the only ones who made it?
I couldn't do anything. It was just too much.
Damn!! I can't stand this!
Oh man… You look like hell.
I… I couldn't save anyone…
…not enough strength.
Well, I'm just glad we're all alive.
Things sure didn't go smoothly.
We might have underestimated the situation.
You mean to tell me that's the extent of my powers? So that's as good as it gets? At this rate I'll never beat the Shinra…let alone Sephiroth…
Yeah, ain't no way you gonna win.
But if we give up now, what's gonna happen to Fort Condor?
No, CLOUD. You mustn't give up. Survivors never give up.
CLOUD… You won't find the answer by blaming yourself.
Things are the way they are… But you can't blame yourself for that, right?
Don't be too hard on yourself, CLOUD. Let's think about what we should do next.
No use crying over spilt milk. Right?
Geez, you don't pull any punches do you? We'll just try not to fail next time.
We have to fight to avoid any more casualties.
We'll do it next time, OK?
They've had their fun, but it's over as of now! There isn't gonna be any more suffering.
CLOUD… What should I do?
TIFA…
CLOUD I wonder what's going to happen?
Y'know, worryin' only tires you out. Why don't you take it easy?
You've got no choice but to take it for now.
Oy, such a bitter pill to swallow.
This ain't no joke, Jack.
Oh man, this is real bad.
Things don't seem too favorable.
I told you I'm not kidding!
If this were a joke it'd be one thing, but this's the truth.
This is a rather harsh reality.
Fort Condor
Hello. I'm sorry but we're not selling anything now. We're using everything we have for ourselves.
Hello. Do your best. We will, too.
Sorry, but I can't sell you anything now.
You hang in there!
Hmmn, now this is something, I never thought anyone would ever climb up here.
…Your eyes are different. Well, anyhow. Any minute now, this will be a battlefield against Shinra.
You'd better get down before you get involved.
Hmmn, now this is something, I never thought anyone would ever climb up here.
Any minute now, this will be a battlefield against Shinra. You'd better get down before you get involved.
Shinra? The hell those jackasses doing here?
You mean Shinra?
What do you mean, a battlefield'?
The Shinra…
Shinra again.
The Shinra? Here too?
What do you mean by that?
A battlefield? We can't overlook that.
It appears you have a problem with Shinra, too. After all, you climbed up here.
Why not listen to what I have to say for a moment?
I guess so
Oh, by all means.
All right, talk on!
The hell you talkin' about!? They're all fightin' the Shinra too! You gonna ignore that!?
CLOUD, let's listen to what they have to say.
After all, we came all this way, CLOUD
I know, I know, CLOUD. But let's listen for a bit.
There's no harm in listening to them.
Is this about the jewels?
Man, she sure's cold.
Do you know what's at the top of this mountain?
Huh? Something's up there?
A huge bird.
Come on, let's get it together.
Look close, old man.
Yeah, come to think of it there was something.
The reactor and the Condor.
That's the reactor and the Condor.
That's the reactor and the Condor.
That's the reactor. And the Condor.
Come to think of it, there was a reactor. But I've never seen anything shaped like it…
No matter how you look at it, that's a reactor. And on top of it, is that the Condor?
I can see you're very perceptive. Yes, it's a reactor and a Condor.
That's right, on that mountain is a Condor and a reactor.
It seems the Shinra doesn't like the idea of having a Condor on top of the reactor.
Damn, that's one big bird! But why are they trying to get rid of it with weapons?
What's so wrong with having a Condor on top of the reactor?
Why?
It's not very logical.
The logic eludes me.
I'm certain there must be state-of-the-art Materia inside the reactor. Am I right?
…That's too much.
Huh? I don't get it.
Huh?…
It seems there's some type of special Materia in the reactor above us.
And because the Condor came, the Shinra rushed troops here.
The military wants to get the Condor and all the villagers off this mountain.
The Condor is now warming its egg, which hatches only once every few years.
We would like to protect the Condor from being harmed.
New lives…
I'll do it! I'll protect them from Shinra!
Condor's egg A real work of nature.
We've got to protect the life of the Planet.
We must protect the condor egg, right?
So, to protect the egg, are you gonna protect the reactor?
We're going to protect the reactor in order to save the egg.
Special Materia, huh? Well, well, things are getting interesting.
I'm gonna leave it up to you all.
…and come out in one piece?
You guys, what are ya gonna do?
Unfortunately, we don't have the ability to fight Shinra ourselves.
That's why we have hired soldiers to help us.
As our sponsor, you can help us with a contribution or by fighting alongside of us…
What do you think? You want to join us in our fight?
What's there to think about? We gotta do it!
CLOUD, why are you still worrying about it?
You decide what we're going to do.
What are we going to do?
If things go right, we might even be able to pray to that special Materia.
I'll leave it up to you so please do as you see fit.
It's difficult to get back what you've lost…
Don't be so wishy-washy. Hurry and make up your mind.
What's wrong with you? And you call yourself a human!?
What a jerk. I'm disappointed in you.
Now we lost the Materia.
Have no regrets for what's already past.
If you've made up your mind, let's just do it.
CLOUD, thanks.
Everyone, listen to what I have to say.
I can't possibly leave these people like this.
Let's do whatever we can to help them. All right?
If you go that far, what can I say? Well, we'll be able to do something if you leave it up to us.
Hey! We'll come to the rescue.
Yes, yes. Let's do our best.
Right. Let me lend a hand, too.
Got it. I'm gonna lend a hand, too.
Okay, it's settled. We're gonna get the Materia, right?
Well then, let's do our best.
That's the right decision.
I see… Come back if you should change your mind.
Have you by chance changed your mind?
Well, let's do it
My position hasn't changed
Whew, we'll be saved.
Ask my son, who's standing guard at the shed, about the details of our military tactics. We're depending on you.
Yes, yes, I've also told the store owners about you, so they should sell you various items.
And feel free to use our beds.
I'm begging you. Please prevent the reactor from being destroyed and the Condor from being killed.
You've come at a good time. Shinra's changing its strategy now.
It seems that Shinra will destroy the reactor and then take out the Materia that's inside.
I see. I guess that means this area, too.
Well, we can't afford to lose any more.
Man, we're walking on dangerous ground. We can't lose now!
Now is the time to dig in.
We can't afford to be beaten!
We can't afford to be beaten!
If we lose here, all the Materia we gathered will be for nothing.
You're right. If we lose here, we'll be in great danger.
We must protect this area.
Damn! I guess we have to protect this area too.
Watch Room
Do you guys want to see it, too?
See what?
What?
What is it?
The condor. It's huge. Come on, have a look.
What do ya think? Awesome, huh?
So, will you help us? I don't want them to get killed.
They're gigantic birds and so striking. We simply can't let them be killed by man's selfishness.
Of course not. There's no way, especially by the Shinra.
If you want to see them, get on that chair over there.
Thanks for accepting.
So shall I let you in on our strategy?
The enemy has targeted our mountain reactor and will be climbing to reach it.
We must set a trap and hire soldiers to protect the place.
Well, this is all we have… This village doesn't have any money. Even if we wanted to fight, we can't because we're broke.
We need 400 gil to hire one soldier. So, if we hire 20 soldiers, we need 8000 gil.
We need to ask you to use your own money to hire these soldiers, buy the equipment, set it up and give the commands.
We know what we're asking is selfish.
We sent our wives and children to another village, But, we're resigned to stay.
Let's get back to basics. If the enemy reaches this shed, you'll have to fight them off immediately.
It's a one shot gamble but we're asking for your help.
The enemy has targeted our mountain reactor and will be climbing to reach it.
We must set a trap and hire soldiers to protect the place.
We need to ask you to use your own money to hire these soldiers, buy the equipment, set it up and give the commands.
If you don't have time could you help us with a donation?
If you donate the money, we can hire the soldiers and block Shinra's attack.
It's not the end of the world, but if you lose repeatedly, it could be dangerous.
Now then, is there anything you wish to ask?
Conditions for victory
The enemy
Type of soldiers
Funding
Other
Enough
You can win by wiping out the enemy or killing the enemy commander.
If the enemy reaches the shed, they'll attack, and you'll have no choice but to battle immediately.
If you lose, the Condor's life and ours…are over.
If you lose during direct contact, and even if the enemy gets to the reactor, there's still a chance to win.
But, it's only a slight chance, and we have no idea how much the reactor can endure in an attack.
When we can't defend against the attack any longer, the Shinra will take our lives, the Condor and all the Materia in the reactor.
We can't use the Tristoner or Fire Catapult, because they are still not ready.
The Fire Catapult is ready now, so we can set it up.
We can't use the Tristoner, because it is still not ready.
First off, we must prepare the troops.
Move the cursor wherever the x mark does not appear, then press [OK] to set-up.
After all positions are in place, press [CANCEL]. This starts the battle.
Soldiers can only be arranged near the shed, in the beginning.
That's because if the soldiers are too far away, they won't be able to follow instructions.
You can only put soldiers above the horizontal line at the very bottom.
Soldiers can be instructed by pushing [ASSIST]. So if any commands are unclear, push it.
Soldiers can report by pushing [OK]…
The cursor will move to the soldier who made the report.
Press [CANCEL] and you'll hear the report without moving.
And you can bet Shinra will send platoons at you on a regular basis.
It would be great if you could spare the time to help us…
But, if you really don't have time, would you contribute some financial assistance?
Hey, looks like they're getting ready to attack right now! Please, any help is appreciated…
Whew, that was good. But, Shinra's troops will be back.
Be sure and scout the area well… We don't know when they'll attack again.
My God! They're attacking! We're counting on you.
We made it through that one somehow. But, Shinra'll be back.
Are you all right? Looks like a few got through.
We have  allies left, so here's  gil.
We have 20 allies left, so we'll return 4000 gil to you.
Hey we're a little short on money… so could you at least make it  gil?
Hang in there, if we lose  more times, we're in deep trouble.
How are things going? Seems like there's no activity at Shinra.
Perfect timing! They're just around the corner. Get ready.
Wait
OK, ready
Contribute gil
Let them handle it
Hear more
Preparations ready?
I see, very well then. Maybe, we'll fight together again sometime.
Sorry. We only have  gil. We have to beg for your help.
We have  gil right now.
We need 3000 gil for each battle.
How much can you help?
500 gil
1000 gil
2000 gil
3000 gil
5000 gil
Nothing right now
We are very grateful, but you don't have enough money.
Thanks. This makes gil.
That's enough money for now. If we run out, we'll ask you for more.
How goes it? The Shinra troops have attacked times since you were here.
So we're getting a little short on funds.
You're just a little too late… They attacked when you weren't here.
The situation has changed. Looks like the enemy is set to attack. If we lose here, it's over.
Our lives are in your hands. We're counting on you.
… Even if you could only spare them…
YES! We did it! That was wonderful! Thank you!! I doubt Shinra will attack now.
A, arrgghh…
There are four types of enemies.
Wyverns
Beasts
Barbarians
Commanders
Anything else?
Wyverns are flying types that can move at high speed. Stoner and Tristoner aren't effective against them.
Beasts are monster types that do not move quickly, but have explosive attacking power.
Barbarians are human types. They attack from a distance, so you've got to be on your toes.
Commanders are the enemy commanders. They're the ones we want to subdue, but they're formidable foes.
Your mobile allies are: Fighters, Attackers, Defenders, Shooters, Repairers and Workers.
Your immobile allies are: Stoner, Tristoner, Catapult, and Fire Catapult.
Which do you want to hear about?
Mobile types
Immobile types
Fighters
Attackers
Defenders
Shooters
Repairers
Workers
Stoners
Tristoners
Catapults
Fire Catapult
Fighters are good at defending and attacking, but aren't especially effective or deficient for any enemy.
Attackers move extremely fast and are best for expanding the front line.
They work good against enemy Beasts, but not enemy Barbarians.
Defenders have high endurance, but move slowly. They're best suited for defense.
Defenders work best against enemy Barbarians, but not enemy Wyverns.
Shooters attack from a distance, but have low endurance.
Shooters work best against enemy Wyverns, but not enemy Beasts.
Repairers repair allied units, but have little attacking power.
Workers set mines. Mines have strong attacking power, but Workers don't.
Mines explode when touched by the enemy. The explosions will damage everything in the immediate area.
Stoners can fire a single boulder, causing extensive damage to every enemy it hits.
Tristoners can fire three boulders simultaneously, causing extensive damage to every enemy they hit.
Catapults shoot rocks a great distance, causing extensive damage to every enemy they hit.
Fire Catapults fire bombs a great distance, causing extensive damage to every enemy they hit.
You must pay for every weapon you set up. Even if you decide to move it later, you can only get back half of the gil you spent.
You have 10 enemies. There appear to be many Beasts, so you may want to deploy more Attackers.
The Barbarians are mixed during this attack.
There are more than 20. Set up for a balanced-attack or we'll be in trouble.
A strong unit's on their way. Looks like around 30.
They'll probably climb up here using various routes. Better be careful or we'll be in trouble.
And make sure to deploy Fire Catapults.
You're probably used to it now, but don't let your guard down.
Deploy Tristoners.
Looks like the enemy numbers 40. Don't let your guard down.
I think you don't need my advice. The rest is up to you.
This is the deciding battle. The enemy numbers more than ever before.
Let's give them all the gil we have.
Received " gil"!
Received "40,000 gil"!
Looks like there's a special Materia up in the Mako reactor.
Their plan is to get rid of the Condor and the people on this mountain and to get the Materia from the Mako Reactor.
Oh, it's you guys? How are things going?
Up to now, you've lost  times. If you lose too many times, you won't be able to come back.
We'll get some rest
Let's move on
Yeah…
Let's get some rest
Maybe next time
Yo!
Take a break
Not right now
Ey, let's get some rest.
Say, let's rest. Okay?
Let's rest. Okay?
We should get some rest while we can.
Let's take a break when we can afford to.
Come on… break time, break time!
Now, shall we get some rest?
It's probably best to get some rest now.
Come on, let's get some shut-eye.