Under Junon
What kinda place is this?
Did you see a man with a black cape?
Are you all right now?
That's all right.
Hey!!
Wait a second!
What happened to this town? It's so run-down…
What's that music? It sure sounds lively.
Rufus!? I gotta pay my respects.
We gotta get to the town up there… Mebbe we could climb the tower?
Yeah, I'd like to take a good look at the new President of Shinra, Inc.!
Seems like something's goin' on up there!
High voltage tower…
I guess this means CLOUD'll have to do it.
Don't you just hate this?
Doesn't it seem a little strange? Everything getting so noisy all of a sudden?
Maybe…he dropped some from the North Caves into the Lifestream…
Sir, do you know where the Lifestream runs through?
CLOUD might have drifted from there.
You think Rufus is thinking about crossing the ocean from here, too?
What? Does that mean Sephiroth already crossed the ocean?
Yeah, better leave it to CLOUD!
You're probably right.
I heard that girl regained consciousness.
CLOUD, didn't you finish Rufus off?
We're counting on you, CLOUD.
That looks like a Shinra soldier.
Does this have something to do with the Shinra?
Aren't you going to follow her?
What's this loud music? It's giving me a headache!
Priscilla
Umm…thanks for helping…
Priscilla
I'm sorry, I mistook you for one of those Shinra, Inc….
Priscilla
I heard they're rehearsing the reception for the new Shinra president.
Priscilla
Grandpa and Grandma told me this beach was beautiful when they were small.
But after the Shinra built that city above, the sun stopped shining here, and the water got polluted…
I was raised on that story and hate Shinra so much, I could die!
Priscilla
No! No! There's a high voltage current running underneath the tower. Don't wander near it, it's dangerous!
Priscilla
But…you might be able to if Mr. Dolphin helps you. Follow me!
Priscilla
I'll give you something SPECIAL!
It's an amulet. Take good care of it, OK?
It's at my house, so come by later to pick it up, OK?
If you want to get on the elevator that badly, give me 10 gil!
Okay, I guess
No way!
Hurry up and get in!
You're such a cheapskate.
HEY! This is Shinra, Inc.'s elevator. Don't be snooping around here!!
What? It's not time for our shift, yet. Just relax.
That's not enough! Can't let you get on…
Uh…yeah…
Who are you people? Where did you come from?
Hmm… I've never seen that feller before.
There's nothing here now… But it used to be a busy port.
Sorry, CLOUD. Priscilla needs to rest for a while.
I just saw some Shinra soldiers all huddled together discussing something.
They said a plane carrying Huge Materia would be taking off from the airport above.
I remember years ago, seein' the Shinra build a long pipe underwater.
The underwater reactor is connected to Junon by a pipe. You should be able to get to the reactor through it.
What? CLOUD is missing?
What? The Northern…what? Sorry, but I don't think I follow.
But…I think I remember hearing Priscilla saying 'Life…something' before.
I think I've heard Priscilla mentioning 'Life…something' before.
Listen CLOUD, I'm over the hill, but Priscilla is still a child.
Isn't there a way to protect at least her from Meteor?
Ever since…Shinra built that city up above during the war…ugh, ugh.
There's been no fish in the water! It got so polluted…phew…
It seems like there's something going on again up there.
Is that huge plane going to take off again with that deafening roar?
I don't think I'll ever…cough… …live to see things… …beautiful again.
Once Meteor hits, not just the fish, but the whole ocean will be destroyed…
There's a dolphin in the bay. If you get close enough and blow the whistle, it might come to you.
If you want to get on the ship, why not have the dolphin take you?
Wow, now this is rare. We almost never have anyone other than the Shinra people visit this town.
I know you guys want to go to the Western Continent, but the only way is on a Shinra ship.
Hey, come in for a while.
For the past few decades, the only thing I've been hearing about is the Shinra.
I miss the times when we used to talk only about fish…
I almost passed out when I saw Weapon.
I heard Weapon was beaten, but a Shinra soldier told me there are 4 more.
They say Shinra's gathering Huge Materia from around the world and bringing it to Junon.
Bringing it to Junon must mean they want to use their airplanes.
I've noticed there's been a lot of Shinra ships recently. I think they're going to the Junon Underwater Reactor.
Isn't Shinra trying to transport the Reactor's Huge Materia?
I heard a war's about to start! And that's why they're moving the big cannon!
Could be the end of the world…
Weapon Store
Hmm, what?
If you see a weapon you want, you'd better buy it.
Dolphin Offing
…That's how it is.
Great…
Hey! Hold on, we're coming!
A gift? What am I supposed to do with it!?
Jump to the top of the pole?
No! You got it all wrong! We're fighting against the Shinra!
Hey! Look at that!
Now ain't that something! I ain't never seen no dolphin jump like that!
Good luck CLOUD! If you make it, we'll follow you!
Whoa, I'll hold the PHS for you. It'll break if it gets wet.
No…stay calm…
Look at that!
No you're wrong! We have nothing to do with the Shinra.
What's that!?
We don't get along with the Shinra.
Hey! It's a monster!
Hey watch your mouth! We hate the Shinra!
Whoa, Gawd!
He-y! Mr.Dolphin!
Priscilla
Who are you guys? Are you members of Shinra, Inc.?
Priscilla
I don't believe you! Get out of here!
Priscilla
Be careful, Mr.Dolphin!
Priscilla
Wait a minute.
Priscilla
Pretty cool, huh? When I blow this whistle, Mr. Dolphin jumps for me.
Here!! This is for you, CLOUD!
Just go into the water, blow this whistle, and Mr. Dolphin'll jump you to the top of the pole!
See that rod sticking out at the top? If you jump just right, you can climb to the top of the town.
You wanna jump with Mr. Dolphin?
Explain it to me again
Sure
I'll pass
Priscilla
Come back whenever you want to see Mr. Dolphin!
Priscilla
There's high voltage running through the bottom of the tower. Don't go near it…
My name is… Pri-scil-la! Now you say it.
Priscilla
Did you drown? It gets deeper the farther you go out.
[SWITCH]  Blow the whistle to call the dolphin.
Jump up to the cargo ship on the dolphin?
Yes
No
Dolphin Offing
This is bad… You don't think she's dead, do you?
Mouth to mouth!?
But… she's just a girl…
Guess I gotta do it…
C'mon CLOUD.
CLOUD, what are you going to do?
CLOUD, hurry!
You know I can't.
Do it, CLOUD!
Priscilla
Uh…ugh…
Priscilla!!
Nope…she's not breathing…
OK, help her…
Young man, do CPR!
What? You don't know how? Come over here, I'll show you.
Just take a deep breath, hold it in. Then breathe into her.
Understand?
Once more
Got it
Hurry up and do it!
Hey hey! Priscilla, are you alright?
That's still not enough!
What are you doing? Hurry up! Breath deeply and give her mouth to mouth!
Push [SWITCH] once to start the CPR gauge.
Push it again to stop the gauge.
Grandma's House
Yeah…
We'll try later
Let's rest
TIFA…
When Sephiroth and I went to Nibelheim, where were you?
The other time.
Hmmm…
Let's get some rest
No time to rest
Get some rest?
CLOUD, come here. Everyone's here.
…We saw each other, right?
No…it was 5 years ago. I don't remember.
But, something seems strange outside. CLOUD, come quick.
Want to rest?
What are you thinking?
I'm gonna relax for a while.
Shall we rest?
Wanna rest?
I heard what happened. You've done so much for Priscilla.
You all must be tired. If you want to get some rest, stay here.
Make yourselves at home.
…That reminds me
You again?
…Who are you?
…You'll find out soon. …But more importantly, 5 years ago…
5 Years ago…Nibelheim?
When you went to Mt. Nibel, TIFA was your guide, right?
Yeah, …surprised me.
But where was TIFA other than that?
…I dunno.
It was a great chance for you two to see each other again.
…You're right.
Why couldn't you see each other alone?
…I don't know. I can't remember clearly…
Why don't you try asking TIFA?
…Yeah.
Then, get up!
Hey, wake up. Wake up, CLOUD!
Priscilla's House
No…that tickles…
No…Stop…
Mr. Dolphin…
Priscilla
Who are you?
At least knock when you enter a lady's room!
Priscilla
Lifestream?
Yeah, I know! It's Mr. Dolphin's playground.
There's a Three-taloned island south of the continent. I heard the Lifestream runs below that island.
But why are you asking about the Lifestream?
Priscilla
Huh, CLOUD!?
Hurry up and help him!! He's very important to me.
Priscilla
CLOUD!!
Stupid jerk! Look how much you made me worry!! Were you at the Lifestream?
Priscilla
You've gotta be more careful! Because you're going to marry me one day.
Priscilla
I'm so happy!! Someday I'm going to be CLOUD's wife.
Priscilla
I've decided I'm gonna be CLOUD's wife.
Yeah, that's right.
CLOUD fell into the Lifestream at the North Cave, and has been missing ever since.
We found CLOUD!
Received "Shiva" Materia!
You cannot take on any more Materia. Please discard some Materia.
Dolphin Offing
Get out of the water?
Yes
No
Junon Airport Path
Eh! Ho!
Hurry! Hurry!!
The new President!! He's here, he's here!!
Hey! You still dressed like that!? Come 'ere!
Hey! Rookie!! Can't you hear me!! Come over here!
Here!! Get in the room!
I'm sorry. Not yet.
Locker Room
Today's the big day when we welcome President Rufus! Hurry up and change!
There's a uniform in the locker. Hurry and change!
Quit yappin'! Hurry up!
It's the Shinra uniform.
Don't change
Change
There's Shinra soldiers all around. Better not try anything dumb…
Brings back memories…
A Shinra uniform…
I was so proud when I first put it on.
I wonder when it was…
…I couldn't stand wearing this thing anymore.
Wow! You look good in it!
You remember the greeting procedure, right!?
…The look on your face says you forgot. All right, I'll show you again!
Do just like I do.
Commander!! We'll help too!
This is how to do it!
We'll sing too!
All right! Show 'em!!
Then I'll sing along with you!
Now, march!! This's the Welcoming March!
Quietly--!!
Aaaaah!
Aaaaah!
Hey, come on now.
Dum, tada! Dum, tada!!
Now!
And…march!!
One, two! Three, four!
Rufus---
Rufus Shinra----
We---are---Shinra Company----
The new-----President------
Oh---Oh---
Shinra----
Oh---Oh oh---
Shinra, Inc.---
Realization---of the new era---
New---President---Ru--fus---
Building---the new era---
Shinra---forev---er---
Got it!?
Not yet
All clear!
All right! Once more!
Good! Make sure you do well at the real parade!
Rufus has arrived! Preparation completed!
All right, show time! Don't disgrace yourselves!
Keep in step with the soldier next to you and march smoothly!
Once you're all in step, shoulder your gun!
To shoulder your gun, press [OK]!
We'll practice some more!
Remember to march smoothly!
This is the military, soldier!!  Your orders for today are to send off President Rufus at the dock!
I'll keep drilling you until it's time!
I'll help, sir!
Me too, sir!
All right!! Line up in order and show me your final pose!
Today's command is Formation!
Remember it!
Ready!?
Junon Military Send Off, BEGIN!
All right! Now you try it!
So, you got it?
Not yet!
I've got it!
All right! Again!
All right! Don't mess up during the real thing!
[OK]!
[MENU]!
[SWITCH]!
[CANCEL]!
Right: Right Turn!
Left: Left Turn!
All right!!
The Special!!
Commander!! What's today's special pose?
Huh? …I haven't decided yet.
All right, rookie!! I'll let you decide!
Show me your best move!
Let's see… My best move is…
Wow!
Awesome!
All right!! We'll go with that as as our special!!
Practice it!
Yes sir!!
Well then! Meet at the dock!! Don't be late!!
Attention! Dismissed!!
[OK]
[CANCEL]
[SWITCH]
[MENU]
Directional button Left/Right: Left/Right Turn
[OK]: Present arms.
Press
[OK], [CANCEL],
[MENU] or [SWITCH].
Left/Right: Left/Right Turn
Someday I'll get to use my special pose in a real battle!
Same here!! I'll keep practicing until then!
Upper Junon
Upper Junon
Let the Welcome Parade begin!
Oh…no!! No one's here!
Late!?
Hey! Rookie!! It's you're fault for running around like that!!
Captain!! We'll take a short cut!
Right!
Good idea.
Get over here!!
Hey!! Don't get me any madder than I already am!
All right! You first!
Thanks!!
Come on, forget about your job! Step right up!!
Come on in!
Upper Junon
Now!! !
Just GO! Then you just nonchalantly sneak in from the back! Make sure no one sees you!
Now listen up! This parade's gonna be broadcast live on Shinra TV around the world!
If you look bad, the whole Junon army will look bad. Remember that and don't screw up!
OK! Jump in when I give you the sign!
Just sneak in from the back! Don't mess up the row! And no matter what you do, don't try to go in from the front!
All right!! Start marching!!
Hey!! Don't run away from me!
Hey!! Don't play around!
Charge!!
No, what're you doing!?
Live TV Ratings%
I'll go first! Now you watch close and do as I do, rookie!
Just sneak into the back of the line when you see an opening.
TV Producer
What the hell was that soldier doing?
AD
I don't know.
TV Producer
Are the points up?
AD
So-so.
AD
They just shot up!!
AD
This's terrible! Am…am I fired?
TV Producer
Really.
I want somebody to send that soldier an expensive gift.
TV Producer
We did it!
Send that soldier something special.
TV Producer
What!? You're FIRED!!
Send that soldier a bomb or something!
Received 6 "Ether"
Received 5000 gil!
Received "Grenade"!
Received 6 "Potion"!
TV Producer
Hmm…
Better send that soldier something.
AD
Well, it's so-so.
Upper Junon
Good! We made it.
Oh! President Rufus!
Hey! Line up and shut up!
Don't make a move!
Hey!
Rufus
How's the job?
Rufus
What happened to the Airship?
Heidegger
The long range airship is still being prepared.
It should be ready in about three more days.
It should be ready in about three more days. Rufus
Even the Air Force's Gelnika?
Heidegger
Gya haa haa!
Rufus
Stop that stupid horse laugh.
Things are different than when Father was in charge.
Heidegger
Gya…
Rufus
Is the ship ready?
Heidegger
Yes Sir, we'll get it ready quickly.
What a disaster.
Heidegger was really irritated…
The man in the Black Cape's been roaming the city, but we can't find him.
Man in a Black Cape?
He showed up two or three days ago, and killed a few of our soldiers.
He disappeared right after that. There's a rumor going around that it was Sephiroth.
Attention! Dismissed!
Hey! Hey you! You messing with the army?
Who cares?
What if I am?
You're too lazy!! No break for you!!
Get over here!
President Rufus is being sent off at the port.
Elevator
Upper Junon
Junon Inn
Are you sure it's all right?
Nap while on duty?
30 gil
Forget it
Welcome to 'Inn'd of the line' in Junon. Wait, I shouldn't be sayin' stuff like that.
Wanna spend the night?
30 gil
Forget it
Come again.
Aw, knock it off already! You don't have enough moolah! No, you 'forget it'!
Enjoy your stay.
Good morning! You still seem a little sleepy.
Looking forward to seeing you again.
Our rates are the same as the 1st class hotels.
Would you like to stay?
400 gil
Forget it
Item Store
Oh, a Soldier! Welcome!
Oh, welcome!
They're not going to get me down! Not me!! Weapon, Meteor, even bad customers, aren't going to get me!
Materia Store
Please! Come in…
Welcome!
No charge for a smile…
Buy a lot, cutie!
Please go to the counter.
Thank you very much!
There're lots of stores in Junon.
If we don't do this…we can't compete.
But, what bothers me is that the girls make more than me.
I hired more girls after hearing that the world's coming to an end, but I wonder if I should have.
I keep getting more and more in debt. I've got to get out from under it somehow. Maybe I'll have Weapon help me.
Look, why not forget about Meteor and Weapon for now and do a little impulse shopping!?
Why don't you surround yourself with young girls and have some fun…maybe for the last time.
Materia Store
Welcome!
I was just starting to get worried… You see our sales were pretty bad today.
Welcome!!
I just can't believe it. I never thought a monster like Weapon really existed.
Weapon Store
I've got nothing to sell to you! Come back later!
Hey! Yo! You want weapons?
Hey! Yo! Our weapons are the best!
Hey! Yo! Wanna buy the whole store?
This machine hasn't been working right ever since Weapon got to it!
Weapon Store
Oh! Welcome! We don't have much of anything now. I forgot to order enough the last time but feel free to look around!
Weapon was really something. No one can compare with his strength. But with a selection like this, our weapons could beat him.
Item Store
I used to be in SOLDIER… Afterwards, I opened this shop…
But to tell you the truth, I'd rather be at the shop downstairs.
I used to be in SOLDIER. Lately, I've felt like dressing up like this…
I know it's out of season, but…
Shinra Member's Bar
Hey G.I. Joe, aren't you still on duty?
Tseng
Stay outta this.
Reno
The President is safe because we're here.
Elena
Just when I think the job's boring, you guys start messing around.
I'm sorry. The bar is only for Shinra employees.
Mommy… My mommy…
I'm a good lookin' man once I take my uniform off.
Booze, booze! Ain't nothing like booze when you're on the clock.
I'm sorry. I'm closing this place down.
All my regular customers were killed by Weapon.
Most of them were pretty weird, but I had good memories of them.
Bar
Looks like something's going on outside, but we're too smashed to do anything…
Ooh, oohh… Oh man, my head's burning up…
I'm sorry! It's all rented out today!
The Shinra people are having a party tonight, and we're all booked up.
Seems like you're all a little too young to be in here.
Rude
Hmm? You too?
Then, take your mask off and come here. That's our rule.
Seaweed… Seaweed…
It just isn't a party without Rude!
Weapon and Meteor scared everyone else off, but I'm sittin' here soused as usual.
I'd like to close down this shop, but we got the regulars to think about. I don't know what to do…
Barracks
Hey, how could they do that!? Nobody woke me up!
And I can't find the uniform I left in my locker, either. I wonder where I forgot it?
Geez! Do you think this is what they call 'hazing?'
Oh man, My future in the military is pretty bleak.
Ever since I was late to that parade, they've been on my back everyday with basic training.
I can't handle it anymore!
Hey!! Stay out of the way!
Hey! Stop yappin'!
Hmm? A know-it-all, huh?
All right!! Come in!!
Hmmm? No rookies!!
Only veterans can go through! Come back when you've grown up.
Hmmm? You have no right to enter!
Hmmm? Back again, Mr. Know-it-all!?
All right! You can enter!!
I'm starting to feel like I can't stop anymore.
I've been had!! I want to get in a real battle, too!
Barracks
Received "Mind Source"!
Received "Luck Source"!
Received "1/35 soldier"!
Barracks
Mmm? I'm not going to the parade.
The road to becoming SOLDIER First Class is very difficult.
Don't mind me.
As a man with promise and future, I don't have any time to fool around like the rest of you.
Ugh…My eyes are tired… No, I've got to really buckle down!
At least until I become SOLDIER First Class.
…grrrrgh…grrrgh…
…zzzz…
Most of my rivals died in the attack on Weapon.
Oh, of course, I was here, studying.
That coveted green officer's uniform is almost in my reach.
Then I'll be on the newspapers as a plain clothed First Class officer in SOLDIER…
Then make a triumphant return to my homeland!! Tons of fan letters… My future's peachy!
Received "Power Source"!
Received "Guard Source"!
Barracks
Hey! Aren't you still on duty!?
Look, I shouldn't talk, but…
Don't become a bad worker like me.
These barracks are for soldiers. This is no place for civilians.
All the real soldiers died fighting Weapon.
Kind of ironic that losers like me are still alive. But that's the reality of it.
I'm trying to be a bad soldier!!
I just can't get the hang of it! This just isn't going right!!
Received "Speed Source"!
Barracks
Shinra Manager
This is so embarassing!
…and they told me I would be staying at five star hotels on these trips…
Shinra Manager
How can you guys sleep in a place like this?
Shinra Manager
I only came to help transport the Sister Ray from Junon…
But now the company says don't bother coming back…
Is this what happens to a loyal Shinra man?
Shinra Manager
Hee Haaaw…
If Weapon killed all the upper management… then I'll be President!!
Received "1/35 soldier"!
Respectable Inn
This is a Respectable Inn… guests only!
You should absorb all the wisdom until it is a part of you.
OK, Mr. Know-it-all, ex-SOLDIER! Let me revenge…I mean, review!
What do you want to review?
ATB
Onscreen numbers
Change and Defend
Escape
Gauges
Status
Elementals
Help
That's all
I'm not so low as to take money off a bunch of low-lifes like you. I'm just doing this to kill time.
ATB means Active Time Battle. It's a system in which time continuously runs during battle.
If the ATB is changed to [WAIT] in the Config Menu… Time stops during battle while you select magic or an item.
That lets you select your commands carefully. It's geared especially for beginners like you.
In the Config menu, if you change from ATB to [Recommended]…Time will stop while magic or item effects are displayed.
This lets you watch the effects carefully. Letting you fight at your own pace… this is the way to go.
I always use ACTIVE mode, but choose what you want. That's all.
During a battle, white numbers that appear on the screen indicate damage, and green numbers indicate recovery points.
Remember that, if you don't want to be Wiped Out.
Change will change your fighting position to either the front or back row.
If you select the back row, the amount of damage you receive is reduced, but so is your attacking power.
[Change] can be selected from the battle menu by pushing the [left Directional button].
You can also select [Defend] from battle menu by pushing the Directional button to the right.
Defend will reduce your damage by half until your next turn.
It's better to use Defend for strong enemies. Of course, I don't need anything like that.
I don't know too much about Escape during battles since I never do it, but…someone like you might need it.
You can escape by holding down [PAGEUP] and [PAGEDOWN] in battle.
It might be hard to understand this next one since you can't check it right now, but just listen.
I'm talking about the Gauges displayed during battle.
The Time Gauge shows the time remaining until your next turn during battle.
You can enter a command once the Gauge is full, but if you don't want to enter a command, press [MENU] to skip to the next person.
This is good when you want to make BARRET work.
The Limit Gauge increases as you receive damage. When this is full, you are able to use a Limit Technique.
The Limit Gauge doesn't reset after each battle, so it will build up the more damage you get in battle.
The trick is knowing when to use it instead of using it as soon as it becomes available.
You may already know this, but I'll tell you anyways. Status has two conditions:  Fury and Sadness.
Fury speeds up your Limit Gauge, but decreases your concentration.
Sadness slows down your Limit Gauge, but also decreases the damage you receive. Keep this in mind.
The Barrier Gauge shows the time available for special magic effects.
The top gauge, Barrier, defends against attacks. And the bottom gauge, Magic Barrier, defends against magic spells.
Both reduce the amount of damage by half, but disappear after several uses.
Always keep an eye on the Barrier Gauge, when using Barrier and Magic Barrier spells.
That's all. Check them out next time you're in a battle.
If you don't understand what I just told you, I guess you just have a limited capacity for information.
But, relax. Push [ASSIST] during battle.
A Help Message should explain the different commands to you.
It'll tell you things like the monsters' names. Even I look at it, sometimes… so don't be ashamed to use it.
Wiped Out… I've never really seen it, but someone told me about it once.
When you get Wiped Out, you can continue from your last Save Point. Your Experience points will not change.
Even wimps like you should be able to get out of difficult areas as long as you fight steadily. You ought to be thankful for this.
Status simply means the status of the characters.
I don't want to repeat myself too much, so I'll mention the main points.
Sleep Cannot enter command until awakened.
Poison Rapidly decreases HP during battle.
Fury Doubles damage, reduces concentration. Tranquilizer cures it.
Sadness Reduces damage. Hyper cures it.
Petrify Turns you into stone. If entire party is petrified, you'll get Wiped Out.
Confusion You cannot distinguish between enemy and ally.
Silence You cannot cast any Magic.
Paralysis Time Gauge stops, you cannot enter commands.
Darkness Reduces attack concentration.
Frog Turns you into a frog. I hate this.
Phew…I'm tired.
Changed Status can be changed with magic and items, so always double check it when you buy things.
Elementals are special Materia that come with magic and weapons.
You have to use this to your advantage in battle. Only once you start thinking in terms of Elementals can you truly be called an intermediate player.
Here are some examples. Remember, they're just examples. You don't have to memorize them.
Fire Fire effect. Works best on animals and water monsters.
Ice Ice effect. Works best on fire monsters and things that hate the cold.
Lightning Lightning effect. Works best on mechanical things.
Earth Attacks using the earth's power. Doesn't work on flying enemies.
Poison Poisons enemies. Doesn't work on any poison-based enemies.
Gravity Gravity-based attack. These hurt if they hit.
Water Calls on the earth's water. Works well on fire monsters.
Wind Calls up the winds. Works well on flying enemies.
Holy Summons the Planet's power. Works well on dark monsters.
Using opposite Elementals often is effective in battle.
Using the same Elementals usually increases Defense. But, the reverse is also true. Watch out for it.
To find out what Elementals an enemy has, you need Sense Materia. Once you get it, try it out.
This is the Beginner's Hall (Intermediate)!
Your explanations were so complicated I couldn't return to the Planet.
So, I have a right to ask you again.
What do you want to know?
How to save?
How do I cure party members?
Curative Magic
Weapons and armor
How to apply Materia
Effective ways to use Materia
Battle formation
Checking status
Limit Techniques
Other
You got nothing to teach me!
For my explanation, I'll need a Potion.
Man, ex-SOLDIERs sure are cheap. OK, I'll GIVE you a Potion…
I don't seem to have any on me. Why don't you go buy one?
Thanks. I'll take that as my pay.
I think you know the basics, but just in case…
Do not open the CD drive or change discs until instructed.
If you open the drive, I can't guarantee anything. That is all.
OK wise-guy, I'll ask about Materia just so you can let off some stress.
You're right…
Growth Materia
Kinds of Materia
Combinations of Materia
Divisions of Materia
Number of Materia you may carry
The rest is a secret
First off, the main points.
Some types of Materia, like Magic, grow as you use them.
Some, like Summon Magic, grow from being used once a battle, to several times per battle.
Their effectiveness changes, too. There are all different kinds.
Some types don't change, but they must grow in order to be divided.
…And that's it. Maybe that sounded too official.
Types of Materia… Here goes!
[Independent Materia] enables Abilities. No linking required.
[Support Materia] is used with Command, Magic, and Summon Materia.
You must equip them in linked slots or they won't be any good.
[Command Materia] lets you use new commands.
There are lots of different kinds of Materia, so you'll never get bored. One called [Attack] changes itself.
[Magic Materia] is easy. You can use Magic, and as your Level increases, you'll learn new Magic.
[Summon Materia] let's you use Summon Magic. As your Level increases, the number of times you can use it in a single battle increases.
This's one of my favorites.
And there you have it, the five types of Materia.
There's no single way to combine Materia. So here goes the basics.
Support Materia… The basic combination is Magic + All.
The variety of magic you can cast will increase as your Magic Level increases.
When your All level increases, so does the number of times you can use it in a battle.
That about covers it.
Huh? Wait a sec…
You can change between Magic-All and Magic with [PAGEUP/PAGEDOWN]. I'll bet you've probably already done this.
One effective combination is Elemental + Summon Materia.
If you equip this combination to your weapon, you can put Magic and Summon Elementals on your weapon.
For example, if you equip Fire + Elemental to your sword, you will end up with Fire Elemental Sword.
I'm getting off the subject,… If you equip Fire + Elemental to your armor, it will have twice the resistance to fire damage.
Now this is important.
When the Elemental levels in your armor increase, so will their effectiveness. From half damage - no damage - absorb.
If you combined Elemental and Fire you could develop Fire absorbing armor.
Wait, there's more. Next is the Added Effect for Support Materia.
The Added Effect Materia grafts the effects of Compound Status Materia into your weapons and armor.
For example, equip Added Effect + Poison to your weapon and select [Attack]. Sometimes you'll make a Poison attack.
Of course, it doesn't always work.
If you don't combine the Added Effect Materia with Status Change Materia, like Confusion or Time, you won't get any effect.
To learn more about Added Effect, access the menu and check the Status.
It's a little hard to get, but if you take your time, you'll be all right.
Division… I'm pretty good at this.
People tell me that my personality is divided. But I don't think so, but maybe it is?
Anyhow…
Once your Materia reaches the maximum level, it will divide.
The original Materia will no longer grow. Once that happens, all you can do is use it as it is.
New Materia always starts out with zero AP, so you need to raise its levels!
Of course, once the new Materia reaches its max, it'll divide. That's how you increase your Materia collection.
Ha, ha… Right now I feel like I'm dividing myself.
Once Materia starts dividing, you must be careful.
There's a limit to how much Materia you can have.
Since we're fighting for the life of the Planet, it goes against my beliefs to carry too much Materia.
Either way, I don't really care but, I'll leave it up to you.
That's why, the amount of Materia that we can have is limited to 200… only what we can equip.
When you have too much Materia, you need to dispose of some. If you don't, you can't take on any more.
So, ditch some Materia before that happens… Ahem…I mean, give them back to the Planet.
OK. Expert! Enlighten us on Limit Techniques, why doncha?
I don't have too much to say about that…
Developing Limits
Extreme Limits
That's it
There are 2 basic ways of building up your Limit techniques. First, just use them!
And second is to finish off as many enemies as possible! It sounds easier than it is.
Everyone knows that when you gain a new Limit technique, you need to select it in the menu.
And you know that you won't be able to use advanced techniques on each level if you haven't used the basic ones.
Since the type and growth for each limit techniques is different, that's about all I will say.
A long time ago I heard extreme techniques exist within the Limit techniques.
But, if that's true you wouldn't be able to get it in any normal way. That's about all I know about it.
Received "Enemy Skill" Materia!
You cannot take on any more Materia.
Please discard some Materia.
Junon Path
What is it? The elevator's out of order for an inspection.
You know, right under us is a Submarine Dock and the Underwater Mako Reactor.
Mako energy puts a lot of wear and tear on the machinery.
A lot of problems can pop up. So it's necessary for close inspections and maintenance.
Hey!! Civilian!! Stay out of our training!!
Go around them! And stay out of their way!!
All right!! Let's see how hard you trained!
Attention! Charge!!
He…hey!! That's the Underwater Reactor!! Come back!!
Our forces are in the process of gathering the Huge Materia from the Corel and the Fort Condor Reactors!
Once these two missions are completed, the Underwater Reactor will be our next target!
Till then, we do nothing but train, train, train!
Lower Junon
Lower Junon
Oh! How's it going!? If you're looking for Junon dock, it's over there!
This lift goes to the Shinra section.
Ever since that Black-caped murderer… But we can't use it because we're all on red alert.
Lower Junon
Need a heli-taxi? Only in Junon!
Free to Air Force personnel!
Sure
Nope
Roger!! Hey! Taxi!!
Just holler when you want a ride!
But if you get airsick easily, maybe you'd better not go.
Where to?
Next sector
Outside Junon
Right! The next sector it is!!
Then outside Junon it is! Take care!!
Junon Dock
All right, it's time!
Ten…HUT!
President Rufus…has now arrived!
This is it!! Junon Military Reception!
Do it right! Do it with enthusiasm! Ready…!
All right! Now finish strong!!
SPECIAL!!
[OK]!
[MENU]!
[SWITCH]!
[CANCEL]!
Right: Right Face!
Left: Left Face!
President's Mood Gauge
Rufus
Very entertaining. Keep up the good work.
Rufus
Looks like you need more practice.
With things looking this bad, you better get ready for cutbacks.
Rufus
Well done.
Keep up the good work for Shinra, Inc.
Heidegger
Gya haa ha!! Here's a special bonus for you!!
A token of the President's kindness! Don't forget it!
Received "Force Stealer"!
Received "HP Plus" Materia!
Received "Silver Glasses"!
Rufus
Once the word gets out that Sephiroth's here, CLOUD and his friends will show up, too.
Heidegger
We'll crush them as soon as we find them!
Rufus
We can't have them get in our way.
Heidegger
Leave it up to me, sir! Gya haa ha!
Rufus
I thought I told you to stop that stupid laugh.
Heidegger
Gya…
All right! Dismissed!
That was close.
Heidegger's been really edgy lately.
Because Hojo disappeared, leaving a letter of resignation.
Heidegger's been forced to take over that investigation, too.
Hey! I thought you were dismissed!
We got some cleaning up to do! Hurry up!
Hey, hurry. You're the last one.
How did you get here?
A dolphin gave me a ride.
Priscilla remembered it after you climbed the pole. But don't be mad at her.
We'll cross the ocean, to the new continent.
…even if we are wearing Shinra's uniforms…
Lately the economy seems to be improving. Must be the 'Rufus' effect.
Cargo ships are always coming and going from Costa del Sol.
I'll forget you're being stowaways, if you help with the cargo.
Junon Dock
Everyday there's no ship coming in, I always come here to watch the sun go down.
The sun disappears like it's being swallowed up by the big horizon.
And somewhere out there is a big unknown continent with another port city.
Twilight always gets me misty…
I'm so glad I became a seaman.
I haven't had a girlfriend in 18 years. And I'm a romantic! …geez.
Well…I wouldn't have time for one now anyway because of Weapon…