Cosmo Canyon
Cosmo Canyon
I am home! It is I, Nanaki!
Hey, Nanaki! You're safe!
Come on, and say hello to Bugenhagen!
…Nanaki?
Welcome to Cosmo Canyon. Are you familiar with this land?
Yes
No
Welcome to Cosmo Canyon. Make yourselves at home.
You lied. That is something that is not treated lightly here in Cosmo Canyon.
Let me explain.
People from all over the world gather here to seek the Study of Planet Life.
Wooooooooo!
I always wanted to come here!
Ummgah! I'm sorry it's full now, so I can't let you enter.
They helped me when I was on the road. Please let them in.
…Oh, is that so? You helped our Nanaki? Please, come in.
Who is Nanaki?
Nanaki is Nanaki. That's his name.
Leaving already? You should get some rest.
Since you're here, why don't you listen to Bugenhagen's story?
Leaving already? But it appears your friends still want to learn more about the Planet…
Did you get to see Bugenhagen's contraption? If you haven't yet, you must!
Hm? If you're looking for Bugenhagen, he went to the Sealed Door.
Remember, there's a steel door on the way to Bugenhagen's room.
What's that door there for anyhow? It's been closed forever…
Oh, it's you. This is terrible. The color of that unlucky star…
The children are all so scared that they won't even go outside.
I'd rather not see it either…
Bugenhagen seems rather down ever since he returned from that trip.
I'm worried something might happen to Bugenhagen now of all times…
Nanaki, it's really bad. Ever since Bugenhagen returned from that last trip, he doesn't seem well.
Why don't you hurry and see Bugenhagen?
Bugenhagen is what keeps our hearts strong…
Here is where I was…I mean, …this is my hometown.
My tribe were protectors of those who appreciate this beautiful canyon and the Planet.
My brave mother fought and died here, but my cowardly father left her… I am the last of my race.
Cowardly father?
Yes. My father was a wastrel.
And so the mission I inherited from my ancestors is to protect this place. My journey ends here.
Hey! Nanaki--! You're home!
Coming, Grandpa!
Good timin'. Let's take a breather.
I got stuff I want to find out, too.
That's perfect. Why don't we take a break too? We can meet back here in a while, OK?
Let's rest for a bit. There are some things I want to find out about anyway.
Rest, rest, rest! I wanna rest! Ok! That's that!
I'm just dead tired. Everyone, how 'bout some rest?
Yaaay! Nanaki! Nanaki's back! It's all thanks to this flame!
This fire is called 'Cosmo Candle'. It has burned for generations.
It is a holy flame that protects this canyon.
I've heard it only went out once, long ago.
The elders said something horrifying occurred, but I really don't know much else about it.
So this is Cosmo Canyon… Quite a mysterious place.
Have you come to seek the Study of Planet Life?
That's it
No
Oh yeah? What? The car broke down!?
Why don't you look around Cosmo Canyon while I fix the car?
Please get some rest while I fix your car.
The repair on your car is completed.
Now you should be able to go wherever you want.
How much do I owe?
Much obliged
No charge! You'd do the same for me, right?
Please, take 1000 gil
I guess you're right
…You don't even have that much. Don't tease me, okay?
Are you sure…? Well, all right. Thank you.
Oh yeah. Did you stay at the inn already?
There was a bottle on the sofa there a couple of days ago…was it yours?
Oh, really?
There really isn't much else to see here.
Yeah? I heard there's an awesome observatory here. I'd like to see it if I have a chance.
Whoa!!
Don't scare me like that. I almost fell over.
Nanaki, are you leaving again? We want you to stay here forever…
Mmm… I think the teachings of the 'Study of Planet Life' are true.
But can people used to Mako energy ever go back…?
Mmm… I can't stand here talking about the Study of Planet Life'.
I think I'll head back to my homeland now…
Oh, Nanaki's with you. Make yourselves at home.
Wait for me! I'm coming too!
Mmm?
Bugenhagen
CLOUD. Please look after Nanaki.
What happened?
I think I grew up a little. That's what happened!
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. Come back whenever you need my knowledge.
Tasty Cocktails!
Pub "Starlet"
Fluffy Beds!
In "Shildra Inn"
Come in today!
It's right near Cosmo Candle!
Cosmo…Canyon? I wonder if there's any relation to the planet or the Ancients…
I finally made it… So this is…Cosmo Canyon!
RED XIII seems different, doesn't he?
Hmmm… Any Materia? Any Materia around?
Hmmm…So this is Cosmo Canyon.
Cosmo Canyon
Oh, welcome.
The people of this canyon hate to compete. So almost everything here are replicas.
But that's all right. Some of them you really can use.
Welcome. You still want more weapons? You sure are weird…
Uh, I mean, it's weird. If there weren't people like you, I'd be out of business. Heh, heh, heh…sweat…!
[Turtle's Paradise Newsletter]
Number 4
Now hiring!
Looking for someone who
can stand long hours of boredom!
For details, contact
the "Turtle's Paradise"!!
Now hiring!
No experience necessary.
Looking for emotionally stable people
who don't get excited at the sight of weapons!
We offer a small, but good
working environment!
Elder's Room
Elder Hargo
Where did I put it? I know it's around here…
Elder Hargo
Mmm? Oh, we have guests.  Good, good.
Elder Hargo
I know, I know.
You came to ask me something, right? Am I right?
It's about the Promised Land
Not really
Elder Hargo
…The Promised Land. So what do you want to know?
There is no one place called the Promised Land. That's what I believe.
No, no, it does exist. Hmmm…you can say that.
In other words, it doesn't exist for us, but it did for the Ancients.
The Promised Land is the resting place of the Ancients.
The life of the Ancients is one continuous journey. A journey to grow trees and plants, raise animals, and make Mako energy.
Their harsh journey continued throughout their lives…
The place they returned to after their long journey… Their burial land is the Promised Land.
Huh? Supreme Happiness? I believe that, for the Ancients, it was the moment that they were able to return to their Planet, That moment when they were released from their fate, and gained their supreme happiness…
At least that's what I believe. I really don't know whether or not it's true.
Elder Hargo
Oh, that's not what you're here for?
I'd appreciate it if you didn't talk about such foolish things as legends and old wives tales.
There was this guy who studied Planetary Life' here.
He couldn't take things the way they were, so he went to Midgar to form AVALANCHE.
Wanna hear more?
Go on
Not really
Guess you could say this is where AVALANCHE was born.
I always wanted to come here… And finally…I made it.
A lot's happened…
And then?
Yeah, whatever…
And then…? I don't know what's going to happen, now that there is no AVALANCHE…
What?
By the way, those that came with you are all at the Cosmo Candle.
Are you leaving?
Elder Hargo
Ahh, here it is.
My job is to gather all the legends and the knowledge of the Planet and to make a book.
Then, even when I return to the Planet, the children may still be taught about many things…
Elder Hargo
Mm…oh, this? This is the Book of Stars. I'm just finishing it.
Nothing is meaningless. If I do this then, someday, someone will run across it.
The Ancients did the same. That is how we know about them, right? Maybe even my book also…
Elder Hargo
I think Bugenhagen has foreseen things.
About the Planet… About Nanaki… And, about himself…
But, Bugenhagen would never say that. All he says is 'Ho Ho Hoooo'…
Pub "Starlet"
Welcome to 'Shildra Inn'.
It'll be 100 gil a night. Would you like to stay?
Yes
No thanks
Welcome to 'Shindra Inn'. It's times like this when a nice soft bed will do you good.
It's 100 Gil a night. Would you like to stay?
Please
No thank you
Welcome to 'Shildra Inn'
As long as there are guests, our lights will always be on.
It will be 100 Gil a night, Like a room?
Yeah
No, thanks
Welcome to 'Shildra Inn'
It's times like this when a nice soft bed will do you good.
It will be 100 Gil a night. Would you like a room?
Yes
No, thanks
Welcome to 'Shildra Inn'
As long as there are guests, our lights will always be on.
It is 100 Gil a night. Would you like to stay?
Yes
No thanks
I'm sorry, but you don't seem to have enough for a room…
Have a great dream of the stars…
Well then, please come again.
Were you able to hear the stars whispers?
Welcome. How 'bout our original cocktail, 'Cosmo Candle?'
A drink now and then is good for you. It'll relax you a bit. …If you know when to stop.
How about our original cocktail, 'Lifestream'?
You should forget your troubles with a drink. We humans sure are weak creatures…
That reminds me. I heard that someone here in Cosmo Canyon is selling some Healing Materia.
Elder Bughe
Mmm…
Elder Bughe
What is it?
The story of the Ancients
Nothing
Elder Bughe
…Hmm. That's no fun… I wanna tell a story.
Elder Bughe
You can't talk of the Ancients, without mentioning Professor Gast. He used to come here sometimes.
He was a Shinra scholar who spent his life studying the Ancients.
He was a serious person, you never would have thought he'd be in Shinra.
Must've been about 30 years ago, when he found the corpse of an Ancient. He was elated!
If I recall…he named it 'Jenova' and was doing a lot of research…
One day, he showed up here, looking very distressed.
He was mumbling something about Jenova not being an Ancient and that he'd done a terrible thing…
He's been missing since then. I heard that he never went back to Shinra
So, if you ever see Professor Gast, I want you to tell him…
That the old man that likes to drink in Cosmo Canyon, wants to hear about the Ancients.
Well, there's lots to talk about, but most things about the Ancients are all legend and folk tales, and no one knows the truth.
Elder Bughe
Mmm. I'm starting to feel good now. That bartender's cocktails always hit the spot.
Elder Bughe
Is that so? You brought Nanaki back here?
Yeah, thanks.
Elder Bughe
By the way, your friends are all in front of the 'Cosmo Candle'
Are you all leaving now?
Maybe there are some people here that know about the Promised Land and the Ancients.
RED XIII… I wonder what's happened to RED XIII…? He's as excited as a little boy.
Are you going somewhere?
Hmm?
Elder Bughe
Live with the Planet, die with the Planet.
Maybe this is the way it should be. Who knows? I'm full of booze…
It's when I think about the children. I wonder if we can just save our own children.
Elder Bughe
Where is the Promised Land…? Maybe Bugenhagen knows.
Isn't Nanaki starting to notice? The reason why Bugenhagen sent him away from the canyon…
[Turtle's Paradise]
No. 5
Our cocktails are good but our wine is the best! Please stop in the Turtle's Paradise!!
Materia Shop
…num…yawn…Sir… You…forgot…your… …change.
…num…Yes, I'm coming…
Are you here to shop?
That's right
No, what's your problem?
Oh…is that so… then let me…yawn…sleep…
Oh…is that so…  You're here to shop?
I'm sorry! We hardly ever get any customers. Oh, but I DO have confidence in our Materia!
I'm…I'm so sorry! It seems I've gotten used to being lazy…
Oh man… Everything will be over, once Meteor hits…
I've been selling Materia for 10 years now, ever since I was 16. Geez, what have I been doing with my life?
Welcome! Oh, it's nothing. Now, please make yourselves comfortable!
Thank you very much!
Oh man! This place looks like a real drag. And their Materia sucks, too.
God. I HATE studying!
Cosmo Canyon
Oh, welcome home. You want dinner first? Or…
Dinner
Or…
All right, it'll be ready in no time…
Oh honey…
Wh…who are you? You…can't just come barging into my home uninvited!!
Hmm, this place seems like it has a lot of secrets.
So, when's dinner?
All right, all right. I'm making it right now.
…But I wonder which one is going to eat…
Those two…uh, Anyway, are you two friends? It really seems strange.
What did they say?
Oh man, I'm so busy. I need more help. …mummble…complain…
Hmm… I wonder what's going to happen now?
Don't worry, Mom! All of us just need to go through that door!
Mr. Bugenhagen sealed it so we wouldn't have to worry about it!
But what's a seal?
What's wrong with Bugenhagen? Is he sick?
No need to be sad, even if something should happen. Everything will return to the Planet…Bugenhagen says so.
Just the thought of something happening to Bugenhagen…worries me.
Nanaki's Room
Don't worry about me. I've seen it many times.
I haven't been back for a while… Let me rest for a bit.
It's not that I'm afraid of that big star.
It's just that, uh, I have a stomach ache… That's why I'm not moving. That's the truth!
Both Nanaki and Bugenhagen are gone… I feel so lonely…
That Nanaki's slick! He said, I'll protect this canyon'! But he didn't. Forget about Nanaki.
Sorry…I'm really sorry. But now, I have…
He's finally come home, but Bugenhagen doesn't seem well…
I want to hear Bugenhagen talk with Nanaki like we used to do…
Nanaki, is it true that Bugenhagen left on a journey? Then that means he's better, right? He IS going to come back soon, right?
…
…Don't worry. Grandpa will come back floating, saying 'Ho Ho Hoooo' again…
Yea, that's right! Ho Ho Hoooo'!
It's Ho Ho Hoooo! Ho Ho Hoooo!
Shildra Inn
Received "Elixir"!
Item Store
Hello. Looking for anything in particular?
Hi. Of course, our store's open.
No need to fear. I have the Study of Planet Life' right here.
No, maybe I AM a bit afraid. But, whenever I'm reading 'Study of Planet Life,' I can forget all my fears.
Received "Elixir"!
Received "Telpostone"!
Received "Magic Source"!
Received "Full Cure" Materia!
You can not take on any more Materia.
Please discard some Materia.
Gate of Naught
Bugenhagen sealed this door shut.
How'd he do that? With super glue?
Nope… It doesn't open… How'd he seal it? With a huge magnet?
It seems like the only one that
can open it is Bugenhagen…
Observatory
Bugen Research Center
CLOUD, this is my grandfather, Bugen.
He is incredible. He knows everything.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. I hear that you looked after Nanaki. 
Bugenhagen
Nanaki is still a child you see.
Please stop, Grandfather. I'm 48.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. Nanaki's tribe has incredible longevity.
So you see his 48 years would only be equivalent to say that of a 15 or 16 year old in human reckoning.
15 or 16!?
Bugenhagen
He's quiet and very deep. You thought he was an adult?
…Grandfather. I want to be an adult.
I want to grow up to be able to protect you and the village.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. No Nanaki. You can't stand on your own yet.
Bugenhagen
To do that now would destroy you in the long run.
Bugenhagen
Reaching up into the heavens, threatening to snatch the very stars from the great city of Midgar. You've seen it, haven't you?
Bugenhagen
Well, that's a bad example. Looking up too much makes you lose perspective.
Bugenhagen
When it's time for the Planet to die, you'll understand that you know absolutely nothing.
…When the Planet dies?
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. It may be tomorrow, or 100 years from now… But it's not long off.
How do you know this?
Bugenhagen
I hear the cries of the Planet.
What's that?
Bugenhagen
The sounds of the stars in the heavens. While this goes on, planets are born, and die.
What was that?
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. That was a scream from the Planet.
Didn't you hear it? As if to say… I hurt, I suffer…
They have come here on a journey to save the planet.
Why don't you show them your apparatus?
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. To save the planet? Ho Ho Hoooo!
Impossible. What can humans do?
Bugenhagen
But, then again, I guess it wouldn't hurt to show him.
He brought friends, too. I'll go get them.
CLOUD, please call one of them.
Only three people can fit in Grandfather's machine.
Bugenhagen!
Several odd looking people are here.
Bugenhagen
The whole place has gotten busy all of a sudden.
Bugenhagen
Don't worry. My machine won't run away. Go and invite your friends.
Bugenhagen
Here, over here. The door's unlocked, come in.
Elder Hargo
I hope great Bugenhagen will take care and not overexert himself.
'Ho Ho Hoooo.' I may be light, But I'm not as young as Nanaki.
Oops. That will only get you angry. You're just like me.  Ho ho ho.
Observatory
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. It looks like you have them all together. Then let's begin.
I'll stand there.
Observatory
So pretty…It's just like the real thing!
Wow! It's just like the real thing!
This is really somethin'!
Whew! Just like the real thing!
Woa! Wooooah! Pretty good, surprisin' me!
Bugenhagen
Hmm, yes pretty good. This is my laboratory.
All the workings of space are entered into this 3D Holographic System.
Hey! A shooting star!
Look, look! A shooting star!
Whoa! There goes a shootin' star!
Whoa! Shootin' stars!
Wh, what the? A shooting star?
Wow, how wonderful.
Oh! This is amazing!!
I'm so overwhelmed!
This's really somethin'!
Whew!!
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. Yes, it is something, isn't it?
Well, let's get to the subject.
Bugenhagen
Eventually…all humans die. What happens to them after they die?
The body decomposes, and returns to the Planet. That much everyone knows. What about their consciousness, their hearts and their souls?
Bugenhagen
The soul too returns to the Planet.
And not only those of humans, but everything on this Planet. In fact, all living things in the universe, are the same.
The spirits that return to the Planet, merge with one another and roam the Planet.
They roam, converge, and divide, becoming a swell, called the 'Lifestream'.
Lifestream… In other words, a path of energy of the souls roaming the Planet.
'Spirit Energy' is a word that you should never forget.
A new life…children are blessed with Spirit Energy and are brought into the world.
Then, the time comes when they die and once again return to the Planet…
Of course there are exceptions, but this is the way of the world.
I've digressed, but you'll understand better if you watch this.
Spirit energy is the source of life for
trees, birds, and humans.
And not only living things.
It makes it possible
to form Planets.
And if that Spirit Energy
were to disappear…
It would be the end of life as we know it.
Bugenhagen
…These are the basics of the Study of Planet Life.
If Spirit Energy disappears, our Planet will die.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. Spirit Energy is efficient BECAUSE it exists within nature.
When Spirit Energy is forcefully extracted, and manufactured, it can't accomplish its true purpose.
You're talking about Mako energy, right?
Bugenhagen
Everyday Mako reactors suck up Spirit Energy, diminishing it.
Spirit Energy is compressed in reactors and processed into Mako energy. All living things are being used up and thrown away.
In other words, Mako energy will only destroy the Planet…
Bugenhagen
The story of the planets… and those who lived with them…
If you want to know more, then you must listen to the words of the elders.
Bugenhagen
Nanaki? His father a coward?
So that's it…Nanaki's been thinking that all this time…
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. You people.
Where is Nanaki? I hope he wasn't a burden.
Ho Ho Hoooo. I'm glad you're back, Nanaki.
I hate to trouble you, but please look after Nanaki.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. That's a machine only I can use.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo.
…no time for humming now. The Planet is nearing imminent death.
But is this perhaps, what the Planet wanted? Did the Planet actually want to end like this?
I don't believe so. Were it not so, you people would still have much to do.
And myself, too. Come back whenever you are in need of my knowledge.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo.
…no time for humming now. The Planet is nearing imminent death.
Where is CLOUD? Wasn't he with you?
Cosmo Candle
Cosmo Canyon… This's where AVALANCHE was born…
I promised my guys someday… when we saved the Planet from the Shinra, that we'd all go to Cosmo Canyon and celebrate…
Biggs… Wedge… Jessie…
Now they're all gone… died for the Planet.
…Really? To save the Planet?
We all… we all hate the Shinra…
But is it right to go on?
Will they… …will they ever forgive me?
…Right now, I really don't know. But I do know one thing.
If there's anything I can do, to save the Planet…or the people livin' on it… Then I'm gonna do it!
I don't care if it's for justice or revenge, or whatever. I don't care…
Urrrrrgh! I'm gonna do it!!
Again… Again…AVALANCHE's born again!
CLOUD…
Bonfires are funny, aren't they?
They make you remember all sorts of things.
You know, CLOUD. five years ago…
…?
…It's nothing.
No, forget it. I'm afraid to ask…
What is it?
It feels like… it feels like you're going far away…
You really, really are… you…right?
I learned a lot. The elders taught me many things.
About the Cetra… And the Promised Land…
I'm…alone… I'm all alone now…
But I'm…we're here for you, right?
I know. I know, but… I am the only…Cetra.
Does that mean we can't help?
……
What a boring place, just like I thought. I wanna go somewhere! Let's go find some Materia!
I wonder how many years it's been… Gosh, it brings back memories……
…Long ago.
…When I was still very small. We were all around this flame…
No, never mind…
What happened?
It's about my parents.
When I talk about my Mother, I am full of pride and joy…
And that's fine. …But when I think of my father, my heart is full of anger…
Bugenhagen
…You really can't forgive your father?
Of course. He…left Mother for dead.
When the Gi tribe attacked, he ran off by himself, leaving Mother and the people of the Canyon!
Bugenhagen
…Come, Nanaki. There's something you should see.
…?
Bugenhagen
The place may be dangerous.
CLOUD. Will you and one other person come with us?
…
…Where're they going?
Can I go too?
I wonder what he wants to show RED XIII?
Dangerous? Count me out…
I wonder what he wants to show him? Hmm, maybe it's Materia that's been passed down for generations?
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo
Are we all set?
Yeah
Just a minute
Bugenhagen
Not ready yet? Tell me when you are ready.
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. Shall we go?
Bugenhagen
All right. Come in, come in.
Okay. You lead the way, Grandpa…
Bugenhagen
What, are you crazy? It's dangerous in there. I told you that!
You want an old man like me to go first? I'll be right behind you.
Sealed Cave
Bugenhagen
What is it? You're going back? I'll be waiting here for you when you're ready.
I can't leave this door open forever.
Bugenhagen
Good. Then we shall proceed.
Cave of the Gi
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo.
Everyone here's a Ghost of the Gi tribe, killed in a certain battle.
 A certain battle?
Bugenhagen
The vengeful spirits of the Gi didn't disappear, and couldn't return to the Lifestream…
We still have far to go. Ho Ho Hoooo.
Bugenhagen
This cave leads to the back of Cosmo Canyon.
Bugenhagen
If we had been attacked by the Gi here, we wouldn't have stood a chance.
…
This is a strange looking rock…
Break it open
Leave it alone
Funny looking rock…
Break it open
Leave it as is
An odd shaped rock…
Break it open
Leave it as is
A strange shaped rock…
Break it open
Leave it as is
Received "Added Effect" Materia!
You cannot take on any more Materia.
Please discard some Materia.
Cave of the Gi
Bugenhagen
As you can see, this cave leads to the back of Cosmo Canyon.
Even though the Gi outnumbered us, they could not attack through here because the passage is too narrow.
…
Bugenhagen
Let's move on.
Received "Black M-phone"!
Received "Ether"!
Cave of the Gi
Bugenhagen
This warrior went through the cave all alone.
Bugenhagen
Fighting attackers one after another…
Grandpa… That warrior…
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo… We're almost there.
Received "Fairy Ring"!
Received "X-Potion"!
Received "Turbo Ether"!
Cave of the Gi
Bugenhagen
What is this?
Grandpa, is he?
Bugenhagen
After death… The ghosts of the Gi. Like stagnant air…
This…can't be!!
Bugenhagen
…Thank you, CLOUD. because of you, we survived.
Nanaki, you have grown strong, too.
…Oh yeah?
Bugenhagen
Now I know that it wasn't a mistake bringing you here…
Come, I have something I want to show you. Right over here.
You cannot take on any more Materia.
Please discard some Materia.
Received "Gravity" Materia!
Cet Wall
This is…
Bugenhagen
…The warrior who fought against the Gi.
He kept them from taking even one step into Cosmo Canyon.
Bugenhagen
But he was never able to return to town…
Bugenhagen
Look, Nanaki. Look at your father, at the warrior, Seto.
…That… That's…Seto?
Bugenhagen
Seto continued to fight the Gi tribe here. …To protect this Canyon.
Bugenhagen
Even after the Gi's poisonous arrows turned his body to stone…… Even after they all ran away… Seto, continued to protect us.
And he continues to protect us, even now.
Even now…
Bugenhagen
You thought that he was a coward and ran away. But he, alone risked his life to protect Cosmo Canyon.
That is your father, Seto.
That…is Seto? …!? Did Mother know?
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo…She knew. The two of them made me promise to keep this cave shut.
Bugenhagen
They asked me to seal it myself and not to tell a soul.
They said we should forget about this cave.
…
Bugenhagen
CLOUD… Would you mind leaving the two of us alone?
Bugenhagen
Nanaki. I want you to continue your journey with CLOUD and the others.
Grandpa!?
Bugenhagen
Listen, Nanaki.
Bugenhagen
CLOUD says they are trying to save the Planet.
Honestly, I don't think it can be done.
For even if they stop every reactor on the Planet, it's only going to postpone the inevitable.
Even if they stop Sephiroth, everything will perish.
Bugenhagen
But, Nanaki. I've been thinking lately.
I've been thinking if there was anything WE could do, as a part of the Planet, something to help a Planet already in misery…
Bugenhagen
No matter what happens, isn't it important to try?
Am I just wishing against fate?
Bugenhagen
I am too old to do anything about it…
This year, I'll be 130. Ho Ho Hoooo.
Bugenhagen
That is why, Nanaki, you must go with them! For my sake.
Grandpa…
Bugenhagen
I wanted to show you your real father before you left…
Bugenhagen
I'm so glad that you came back while I was still alive to show you.
Grandpa…don't talk like that. I don't want to think of life… without you…
Bugenhagen
Ho Ho Hoooo. Well, I've had a long life.
Grandpa! You must live!
I'll see to it.
I'll see to what's happening to the Planet. And I'll come back to tell you.
Bugenhagen
Nanaki…
I am Nanaki of Cosmo Canyon! The son of the warrior, Seto!
I'll come back a warrior true to that noble name! So please, Grandpa…
Bugenhagen
That's…Seto's… Seto…
Seto… Fa…Father…
Shall we get going?
So this is it, RED XIII…
That's just the way it goes. …You came in handy at times…
The buggy's fixed, so we can go now.
They said they finished fixin' the buggy.