What!?
This was all burnt down, wasn't it?
…I thought so.
Then why… My house is still here too…
The hell's goin' on!? This a dream or somethin'?
…Something's strange?
I wonder what's going on…
CLOUD, maybe you were just dreaming…?
Hey, it isn't like what you told me!
What the…?
You said the whole town burnt down, right?
This is Nibelheim, right? But the town's all here.
This is Nibelheim? I heard it burnt down.
The whole town was destroyed by Sephiroth. At least that's what I heard…
Didn't you say that your hometown burned down?
I thought someone said this town burnt down!
You tryin' to fool us?
Hey, what's going on?
CLOUD… Did you lie to us?
CLOUD, did you make up that story just to get our support?
Yo, CLOUD. It's not good to lie.
What happened?
I'm not lying!
I remember…the intense heat of the flames…
Wooow… He's…calling…Sephiroth… is…calling…
The…Great…Se…phi…roth… is…near..."
In…side…inside…the Mansion… Urrrrrrrgh…the great…Sephi…roth
Great…Sephi…roth… …left us…
Over…mountains… …gone…
What is it?
Nothing
I lived in this house until I was 14…
No, but this town was burned down.
You're sick, saying such things…
Get out of here!
Oh, really. Then, it'll help me too.
What's going to happen to this Planet!? What the hell's Shinra doing!?
A man with a black cape!?
He has a tattoo of the number '11'…
…Must…go… …Reun…ion…
…Must…get…it… and bring…to…Se…phi…roth…
Then…become…one… with…Se…phi…roth…
This guy's number '5'…
CLOUD… CLOUD was playing.
I wonder what…this is?
Received "Elemental" Materia!
It looks like Materia, but I can't hold any more.
TIFA's secret savings, 1 gil came out of the keyboard.
I've heard this melody somewhere before. I played it well.
I have the sheet music for that song.
Huh? Wait a minute! There's something inside the music sheet.
TIFA, what's happened to our town? Was it all an illusion, or just a dream? No, it was neither. I remember trying to get people out of the flames, but not having the strength… Burning with anger, I went to the reactor to kill Sephiroth.
But he was nowhere to be found.
Instead, I found you, collapsed inside. 
I felt saving you was far more important than going after Sephiroth.
There were several others that were still alive inside, but I was only able to save you.
As I was coming out of the reactor, Shinra troops were just arriving.
I recall a scientist named Hojo was in charge. He ordered the troops to gather up everyone still alive for the experiment. I didn't know what type of experiment he was talking about, but I wasn't about to let them have my dearest student.
Putting you on my back, I headed down the mountain to the village. I used the Cure spell on you many times.
And started to head for Midgar to look for a doctor for you. I didn't like that city, and my Cure spells weren't helping.
I decided to go to Midgar to find a doctor I could trust. I'm worried about you, but I can't settle down in one place for very long.
Have you recovered fully? Are you well?
I wonder how many years have passed since then? I just got into town again, but I can't believe it… The whole town is back to normal, except for the strange people with black clothes all around.
The town reeks of Shinra, but I won't go after them. You may think I'm running from them, but it's just that I don't want anything to do with Shinra anymore. Feels like time is running out.
I'm sure you'll find this letter. And this gift for you. It should come in handy.  
I want to give it to you myself, but it's hard for my students to see me as an old man. I can't even jump anymore. But I hope you continue to sharpen your skills and remember what I taught you.
To my most precious student,  From Zangan
Tifa's Final Mystery?
Received "Final Heaven"
Did you play my piano?
No, I didn't
Yeah, I jammed on it
Just a little…
I can read sheet music too, you know. Ummm, let's see…
Do…\ Re…> Mi…> Ti…\ La…\ > Do…> Re…> Mi…> So…> Fa…> Do…> Re…> Do…\ Forget it…
Play the piano?
…Now, how did this go?
I forgot
I remember
Do [CANCEL]
Re [SWITCH]
Mi [MENU]
Fa [OK]
So [PAGEUP]/[PAGEDOWN] + [CANCEL]
La [PAGEUP]/[PAGEDOWN] + [SWITCH]
Ti [PAGEUP]/[PAGEDOWN] + [MENU]
Do [PAGEUP]/[PAGEDOWN] + [OK]
But…I definitely remember playing the piano then. So why wasn't it burnt down?
Tattoo number '4'
Received "Platinum Fist!"
…Where…are…you? Great…Se…phi…roth…
Periodic Report to Professor Hojo
1  Clone Activity Report
Unfortunately, no 'CLONES' have left this town this quarter. As previously reported, the 'CLONES 'seem to be sensing something.
But all they say is, 'Reunion' or 'Sephiroth' and show no other signs of activity.
2  Confidentiality Report
A total of eight people have visited this town this quarter.
Fortunately, none knew about the incident five years ago.
Therefore, no one knows the town was restored exactly as it was five years ago. Our staff, disguised as townspeople, have improved their acting skills, and we do not report any problems at this time.
That is all.
Give me a room
It'll be 100 gil a night. Is that all right with you?
Enjoy your stay.
You don't have enough money.
Well, maybe next time…
Oh, I'm so sorry. I've got lots to do…
This town was supposed to have burnt down five years ago.
What the hell is going on?
Sir, don't say such awful things.
I was born and raised in this town. What you say never happened.
You're lying…
EXCUSE ME! That's so rude…
If you're going to talk like that, I'm going to have to ask you to leave.
I'm checking the Mako boiler. Please don't bother me now.
…Welcome. It's 100 gil a night…
Spend the night.
He has a tattoo number '6'. Hmm? He has something…
Urrr…rrrrr…rrrgh… Must…go to…Re…union…
Nibelheim House
Re…union.
Re…union.
…The Black Cape…
Nice town, huh?
We've been in business here for a long time…
…You're lying.
Do you have anything to do with this town?
How about bein' born and raised here?
Nope, guess not
I was here until I was 14, and I don't remember you.
…Nothing.
It's not nice to lie!!
Oh yeah?
How can you shop at a time like this?
What? Me, in business?
Don't worry, it's all right. I get paid by the company.
But my real job is protecting Nibelheim's secret.
What? Secret?
We don't have a clue. But it's all right.
It's all over anyway!
Finished, finito, over!! Even as we speak Meteor… This is the end!
He has a tattoo of the number'12'. Mmm? He has something.
Can…you…hear? The…voice…of…Se…phi…roth?
Something is written on the back of the lid.
(1)Right 36
Something is written on the floor.
(2)Left 10
(3)Right 59
(4)Right 97
I have a bad feeling about this…
Open the safe
[Empty Entry]
Success
Fail
Received Key Item "Key to the Basement"!
C project
specimen(B)  codeC
A scratch left by a fingernail inside the beaker… Let's get out of here…'.
specimen(A)  codeZ
A scratch left by a fingernail inside the beaker… Feeding Time'…that's our chance…!
Escapee Report no. 1 X Month X Day Two escapees were located near Midgar.
Escapee Report no. 2 Description at the time of capture.
A  Former member of SOLDIER/Number(   ) No effect could be detected from either Mako Radiation Therapy or Jenova on him.
B  Regular/Number (   ) Reaction to Jenova detected.
Escapee Report no. 3 Status.
A  Shot for resisting.
B  Escaped during A's resistance.
Escapee Report no. 4 Other
B's whereabouts is currently unknown. But pursuit is unnecessary due to his diminishing consciousness. Awaiting further instructions.
Sephiroth!
Being here brings back memories.
Are you going to participate in the Reunion?
I don't even know what a Reunion is!
Jenova will be at the Reunion. Jenova will join the Reunion, becoming a calamity from the skies.
Jenova, a calamity from the skies? You mean she wasn't an Ancient!?
…I see. I don't think you have the right to participate.
I will go North past Mt. Nibel. If you wish to know…then follow…
…Reunion? Calamity from the skies?
Hojo's Letter
I must get rid of all those that stand in the way of my research. Even that one from the Turks.
I scientifically altered him and put him to sleep in the basement. If you want to find him, search the area.
But…this is merely a game I thought of. It is not necessary for you to participate if you don't want to.
There seems to be another letter.
Read it
Ignore it
Move the dial on the safe carefully but quickly. You have 20 seconds. You can not go past the numbers while turning. The 4 hints for the numbers are…
dial (1)
dial (2)
dial (3)
The lid of the box with the most oxygen.
Behind the Ivory's short of tea and ray.
The creek in the floor near the chair on the second floor… then to the left five steps, up nine steps, left two steps, and up six steps.
The fourth row has been written in invisible ink…
Dial (4) is  (Right 97)
Look, something is written on the back…
Look at the back
Ignore
You still don't get it? Don't give up if you've only checked it once. You have to be persistent.
Look, this letter could be in invisible ink.
Read it
There are four things in this mansion… Check more closely.