Icicle Inn
What's down there?
You mean Boss…Tseng? That wasn't us. Sephiroth did it.
I'm not lying… it was Sephiroth.
Oh, man…
Wa…wait! Get out of the way Stay put Elena
There they are, hurry!!
Elena
CLOUD…huff…wheeze.
I won't let you go any further!
Elena
It's a SE-CR-ET.
It really doesn't matter! You really got guts messin' my boss up like that!
Elena
No! Liar! Don't think you can fool me!
Elena
Don't try to act innocent. I'll never forget it!!
Elena
Looks like just talking won't do. You're going to have to feel some pain!
Elena
No, I can handle him! There's no way he can avoid my punch.
Elena
Eyaaaah!
Elena
Why? Why didn't you try to duck?
Elena
There's no way they can climb the Great Glacier anyway.
Put them in some house in the village.
Yes ma'am!!
Just you…and me!!
What?  Yeah…
This village is now under martial law!
(Do as you're told)
(Kick his butt)
Don't be angry. I'm just doing my job.
Stop it, there're kids around!
Listen, I probably shouldn't tell you, but I hear something big's going down up North.
The President's gonna be there. So, would you please just lay low for a while?
Ele…Elena!?
Who--a!!
No, don't!! There's a steep grade, past here.
It's dangerous, please don't go!
I'm still going
Thanks for your kindness
Damn, I was just being nice…
What the? Who are those people over there? Looks like trouble!
No, no. I just did what came natural.
I guess I'm not too busy now. Do you want to learn how to ride a snowboard?
Maybe I should
Not interested
Do you want me to explain again?
Yes, please
No thanks
You're so boring!
Sorry I ran off a while ago… I thought there was going to be trouble.
Anyhow, you'll need a snowboard to get down that hill. Want to learn how to ride one?
Yeah, maybe I should
No, not interested
All right, fat-head… But don't blame me if you get hurt.
What the? They sure were weak for Shinra.
I told you, you can't!
You won't make it without a snowboard and a map!!
Be careful!
There's a steep hill past here. You shouldn't go any further.
There's a barrier at the North end of the crater! You shouldn't go any further.
A bright light shattered the barrier at the crater! What in the world's goin' on!?
When I first moved here, I saw a man with a black cape heading North.
It seemed strange seeing the black cape in the snowy white.
Sledding's fun!
Who is that man?
I'm gonna try snowboarding after this!
Next time, I'm gonna make an even bigger one.
What's a barrier? You mean that light on the top of the mountain?
A sad voice is getting louder every second!
The mountain must be crying. Is it hurt?
It's almost finished!
I heard that there's a barrier on top of the mountain.
Once the barrier's gone, I can hear cries from beyond the mountain…
Dodge that punch!
[up]
[left]  [right]
Directional button [up]  Move forward
Directional button [left] Move left
Directional button [right]Move right
Directional button [down]Brake
[SWITCH]Brake
[CANCEL]Jump
Directional button [left] + [PAGEDOWN]Edge Left
Directional button [right] + [PAGEDOWN]Edge Right
Icicle Inn
I got hurt on my snowboard, and now I can't go out for a while…
Hey, I'll give you my snowboard.
…whimper…weep…
Tell me if you get good at it.
I wanted to get a lot better at snowboarding…
My boy got hurt right about the time we moved here…
I never shoulda got him that snowboard.
Teach me too, OK!?
I can't live in this town anymore. It gets so cold here!
I have to move again… I don't know where to start.
The reason for the drop in temperature must be because of that dome of light at the Northern limits…
You all should get away from here and go to a place like Mideel Island in the south.
Received Key Item "Snowboard"!
Icicle Inn
The master is an experienced climber, you know.
I've heard that he knows every corner of that Great Glacier!
Grandma, don't sleep so close to the fire!
Grandma's been sick for a while and doesn't have much energy…
I just get SO comfortable.
My husband left 20 years ago and still hasn't come back.
He should at least be at the foot of Gaea's Cliff. It's marked with a check on the map…
…cough…cough… I've been living in this town for 60 years. And I STILL caught a cold…
I heard there's a doctor on a Southern island somewhere. I sure wish he'd come here…cough…cough…
It's nearly impossible to reach the Northern limits without a map.
If you're thinkin' 'bout going to the Northern limits, you'd better take that map on the wall.
What nerve! You already tore down the map.
I'm thinkin' 'bout taking that hill on my skis.
It's the first time that the temperature has dipped this low, this fast…
There's also that mysterious light at the Northern limits, too. Does this mean it's the end of the world?
Received Key Item "Glacier Map"!
Look at the Map
Take the Map
Received "Hero Drink"!
Received "Vaccine"!
Weapon Store
Weapon Store
You'll have a hard time selecting from all the good things we have!
Weapon Store
…smack…mff… Oh…welcome, glad you came.
Grandpa, wake up! We have a customer!!
Icicle Inn
It's colder than usual today…
It's 200 gil , you wanna spend the night?
Yes
No
Icicle Inn
You don't have enough money.
Icicle Inn
Enjoy your stay!
Icicle Inn
Please come again.
You heard about the gnarly hill in this town? They tell me it's off limits!
What luck! We came all this way…crap!
We came from Costa del Sol to snowboard, but we're just about to leave!
Whew, what is it? Don't get too close, or it'll burn ya.
Icicle Inn
Received "X-Potion"!
Icicle Inn Bar
Bartender
I've heard there's a snow woman at the Great Glacier that hates hot springs…
But I think it's just a myth to scare off visitors.
Do you know what a Cetra is?
Yeah, a Cetra lived in this town a long time ago.
Her name was Ifalna, and she knew about a lot of things…
I heard she was abducted by the Shinra and was taken somewhere.
With all the strange things happening in the world, I kinda understand why people want to leave…
What were the Cetra? Oh yeah, they were the same as the Ancients, right?
Whadaya mean?
Shinra and the Ancients… I smell somethin' fishy…
Maybe we'd better leave town soon too.
Let's go to that island in the South! What was it called?
Yeah, yeah, I heard that there's a town called Mideel on a southern island.
I heard some guy went to the Great Glacier in the North.
What an idiot. Is he thinkin' 'bout going to that hot spring?
He's probably gonna get lost in the glacier and freeze to death.
No matter how well equipped he is, out there in that cold on the glacier, I give him two days at the most.
You thinkin' of going North?
That's my plan
No
Well…if you're going past this town you'll need a map.
Maybe there's one left at Mr. Holzoff's house. He used to be a mountain climber.
Yeah, we really don't have anything here, but make yourself at home.
If you go further North, I heard there's a Huge Crater.
Something huge must've fallen from the sky a long time ago!
Am I boring you?
Welcome! You look like a STRONG one…
If you want, I could lend you an ear?
Yeah
Not interested
What's with you!? You make me sick!
I got bored listening to his stories.
Oh yeah?
WHAT YOU LOOKIN' AT!?
You're a real freakazoid, aren't you?
Eyaaaaaaaaah!!!
I'm still in here! All right!?
Gast's House
Play the Video?
Yes
No
The Original Crisis
What is "Weapon?"
Confidential
Don't watch
Daughter's Record: 10th Day after birth
Daughter's Record: 20th Day after birth
Don't watch
Then, Ifalna, please tell us about the Cetra.
Tell us, Ifalna… Where is the land called 'Knowlespole'?
Ifalna, what exactly does Planet-reading entail?
Do the Ancients, rather, the Cetra, have special powers to heal the Planet?
Hmm, even here so close to the North Cave, the snow never melts. Is that because the Planet's energy is gathered here to heal its injury?
Ifalna… Let's take a break.
Who is the person that appeared at the North Cave? I haven't any idea.
You don't look well… Let's call it a day.
Camera's ready!
2000 years ago, our ancestors, the Cetra, heard the cries of the Planet.
The first ones to discover the Planet's wound were the Cetra at the Knowlespole.
Knowlespole refers to this area. The Cetra then began a Planet-reading.
…I can't explain it very well, but it's like having a conversation with the Planet…
It said something fell from the sky making a large wound.
Thousands of Cetra pulled together, trying to heal the Planet…
But, due to the severity of the wound, it was only able to heal itself over many years.
No, it's not that kind of power. The life force of all living things on this Planet becomes the energy.
The Cetra tried desperately to cultivate the land so as not to diminish the needed energy…
Yes, the energy that was needed to heal the Planet withered away the land…then the Planet…
The Planet tried to persuade the Cetra to leave the Knowlespole, but…
I'm all right… When the Cetra…were preparing to part with the land they loved…
That's when the one who injured the Planet… or the 'crisis from the sky', as we call it, came.
The Cetra were attacked by the virus and went mad… transforming into monsters.
That's when it appeared!
It looked like…our…our dead mothers …and our dead brothers. Showing us specters of their past.
It first approached as a friend, deceived them, and finally… gave them the virus.
Then, just as it had at the Knowlespole.
It approached other Cetra clans… and infected them with…the virus.
Ifalna, can you comment on the thing called 'Weapon'?
Back then, Weapon was a weapon the Planet produced by its own will?
So, Weapon no longer exists on this Planet?
Where is Weapon?
…Thank you, Ifalna, that will be all for today…
Yes, Professor.
Yes, but… There is no record of Weapon ever being used.
A small number of the surviving Cetra defeated Jenova and confined it.
The Planet produced Weapon… But it was no longer necessary to use it.
Weapon cannot vanish. …It remains asleep somewhere on the Planet.
I don't know… I can't hear the voice of the Planet well…
Times…have changed. The Planet…is probably watching this situation closely.
The one the Professor mistook for a Cetra…was named Jenova. That is the 'crisis from the sky'.
The Planet knew it had to destroy the 'crisis from the sky'…
You see, as long as Jenova exists, the Planet will never be able to fully heal itself.
Even though Jenova is confined, it could come back to life at some time…
The Planet has not fully healed itself yet. It's keeping watch on Jenova.
… Please don't say it that way.
It's our lovely daughter, both yours…and mine!
Don't you want to capture her childhood on videotape?
Never say that! I will protect you and AERIS no matter what!!
You and AERIS are my only treasures. I'll never let you go!!
Who could that-? I was just about to…
Damn!!
How dare they intrude on our 'private time' together!
Hojo… How did you know?
A new sample? You don't mean AERIS!?
That's it! I'm severing all ties with the Shinra.
Hojo, please leave.
Ifalna!
Don't worry, Ifalna. I'll take care of this!
Ifalna! Take AERIS and run!!
Video again? You just got through taping!
If you keep doting on her like that, she won't grow up to be strong…
AERIS is different from the other children. I wonder what dangers await her…?
I feel so much better now, darling.
If I hadn't met you, I…
I'll send them away.
Yes, at once!!
Who the devil?
It, it's them!!
Please, AERIS has nothing to do with it! All you want is me, right?
Eyaaaaaah… Darling…!!
Heh, heh, heh I've been searching for you, Ifalna… or should I say, Cetra!
Long time no see, Professor Gast!
Believe me, I had to turn over a stone or two to find you.
Two years I waited… That's how much I wanted this new sample. Ha, ha, ha.
Hmm, AERIS? What a nice name. Ha, ha, ha.
I'll need all of you for my experiment.
You understand don't you, Professor Gast? We can change the future of the Planet!
Please don't put up a fight. I don't want any harm to come to my precious sample.
Mmm? What a funny looking camera. Guard! Destroy it!
Be careful with her!! Ha, ha, ha…
Wh…what are you doing, Professor!?
Oh, and uh… don't forget the child!
Hmm, a video? The Ancients…Weapon!?
Heh, heh, heh…a mountain of treasure! Thank you Professor…Ha, ha, ha
You understand don't you, Professor Gast? We can change the future of the Planet!
Oh, I'm thinking of taping it on video.  But, the video's not working right…
No, that's not it. I'm going to record my beautiful daughter.
I've already decided! If it's a girl, then it'll be AERIS. That's that!
Right!? Oh, the video tape…
And when she's sleeping, her face …looks like an angel.
What are you doing, Profes-- I mean, honey?
What are you going to tape? Is there still something I haven't mentioned?
First, we have to figure out her name. We can take the video later!
You are SO selfish! But AERIS is a good name!
Hee hee…it's a good name, considering it came out of that forgetful head of yours!
Received "Turbo Ether"!
Ugh…
I guess we're still in one piece.
Everyone all right?
Yeah, I guess.
Of course.
I'm sick of this.
…Snow in my ear.
God! I can't stand it!
I'm a little off.
Yeah, I'm all right.
I'm too old for this! Damn!
So where did we land?
That didn't seem like such a big jump…
In fact, it feels like we didn't even jump at all…
We've jumped pretty far…
We've jumped pretty far…
Well, we've got a map, right? Look at the map by pressing [SWITCH].
Hey. Let's take a look at the map. Press [SWITCH].
We need the map, okay!? Let's see it with [SWITCH].
Hey, what's that!? You just got something, right? Use [SWITCH] to see it.
All right, let's look at the map. We use [SWITCH], right?
Then, let's look at the map. Just push [SWITCH].
We should check it on the map. Press the [SWITCH].
Quick! The map, the map! Look at it with [SWITCH]!
It sure is cold. We'll freeze if we stay here any longer.
This is the only place not frozen.
Touch it
Let's go on
Hmm, a hot springs.
…go.
Don't worry about me.
Now, I don't want to hurt any of you.
And don't come back again.
Please, stop it.
Please, that's enough.
Yeeew… You got a lot of nerve trying to touch me with the same dirty hands that touched that filthy hot spring!
I'll never forgive you.
Hah, just remember your place!
Still don't get it, eh?
Why this?
Received "Alexander" Materia!
Cannot take on any more Materia.
Please discard some Materia.
The only way is to cross…
That's the way it goes…
I don't feel like it
Face the direction you want to jump in then press [OK].
Received "Added Cut" Materia!
Looks like trouble.
We're outta here!
Wait a minute!
Received "All" Materia!
Received "Safety Bit"!
Received "Mind Source"!
Base of Gaea's Cliff
Now, this is a surprise!!
It's been years since I last saw anyone up here.
Oh, I'm sorry, my name is Holzoff. I've lived here for 20 years.
Do you mind hearing some stories from a lonely climber?
Why don't we go to the next room and sit down.
To climb this cliff, you must check your route
…And you have to keep your body temperature normal. Don't forget these 2 things.
Like to rest a little?
Oh yeah
No, thanks
Don't overdo it.
You awake?
You collapsed at the Great Glacier. It's a miracle you're alive.
My name is Holzoff. I've been living here 20 years now.
If you are planning to head north, you'd better listen to me.
It's dangerous past the cliff because of the Barrier!
It's better not to go anywhere near it!!
You shouldn't go near the cliff unprepared, it's dangerous!!
[OK]Confirm route.
[SWITCH]Push repeatedly to raise body temperature.
Base of Gaea's Cliff
Holzoff
You ever hear about those who challenged the cliff?
Yeah
No
The first time my friend Yamski and I tried to climb the cliff was 30 years ago.
There's an old legend that says something fell from the sky here a long time ago.
It's supposed to have pushed the land up and formed this cliff.
20 Years ago, Yamski and I braved this cliff to see what was on the other side.
But, we weren't prepared for it. We never dreamed the temperature would be so low…
That cliff has a biting cold wind that lowers your body temperature.
Yamski was below me. He cut his own rope…
…I didn't even notice…
I've lived here ever since… challenging the cliff and providing warning and shelter to my fellow climbers.
If you're going to climb the cliff, you need to take 2 precautions.
First, check your route… It's hard to find because of all the snow.
Second, warm yourselves up once you get to a ledge.
Understand?
One more time
Yes
You must be tired coming all the way up here… Better get some rest before you head out.
Want to get some rest?
Rest
Don't rest
[OK]Confirm route.
[SWITCH]Push repeatedly to raise body temperature.
Base of Gaea's Cliff
We'll secure the route. You come up later.
You know, I've been thinkin'…
What is it?
Save it for later
…Seein' a place like this, makes you realize how awesome nature is.
But, if anyone ever told me to live here, I'd tell them to…well, you know…
I tell you one thing though, If I did have to live here I'd change things around 'n' make it better.
I guess Midgar is the total opposite of this place.
When you think of it that way, the Shinra don't seem so bad…
Uuuuuurrrrrgh!!
What the hell am I sayin'!? The Shinra, not bad!?
Y'know…standing here like this…
Kinda makes you feel like the Planet's not really with us, y'know?
Of course we can't even compete. I mean… The Planet don't even notice us humans…
Gotta keep telling myself this blizzard's okay…brr
I wonder what's at the top of that cliff? Well we shall see…
Brrrr, I can't take this cold!!
Damn! If I was back in the air, this cliff would be nothing!
I wonder what's on the other side of that cliff…
This is secret info, but… Rufus's going to arrive here, too.
Look we can't go to the cliff! So just give it up!!
Change members?
Yes
No
Gaea's Cliff
Degrees
Received "Protection Ring"!
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
Received "Javelin"!
Received "Ribbon"!
You can not take on any more Materia. Please discard some Materia.
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
Push the rock over?
Push
No
Gaea's Cliff
Dead end.
Go up
Go down
Go right
Go right
Go down
Degrees
Received "Enhance Sword"!
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
Received "Speed Source"!
Received "Elixir"!
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
Received "Enhance Sword"!
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
Received "Megalixir"!
Received "Fire Armlet"!
Jump down to the room below?
No
Yes
Gaea's Cliff
Go up
Go left
Go right
Go up
Go down
Go down right
Degrees
Received "Fire Armlet"!
Received "Elixir"!
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
HP/MP restored!
Inside of Gaea's Cliff
Ugh… Errgaahh!!
Gaea's Cliff