なに	何	int	what,how many,large number of, many,you-know-what, that,whatsit, what's the expression, what do you call them,what?,hey!	Who goes there!?	なんだ、おまえたちは！
おまえ	お前	pn	you,presence (of a god, nobleman, etc.)	Who goes there!?	なんだ、おまえたちは！
たち	達	suf	pluralizing suffix (esp. for people amp animals; formerly honorific)	Who goes there!?	なんだ、おまえたちは！
いく	行く	v5k-s, vi	to go, to move (in a direction or towards a specific location), to head (towards), to be transported (towards), to reach,to proceed, to take place,to pass through, to come and go,to walk,to die, to pass away,to do (in a specific way),to stream, to flow,to continue,to have an orgasm, to come, to cum,to trip, to get high, to have a drug-induced hallucination	C'mon newcomer. Follow me.	行くぞ、新入り！オレに続け！
しんいり	新入り	n, adj-no	newcomer, initiate, rookie	C'mon newcomer. Follow me.	行くぞ、新入り！オレに続け！
おれ	俺	pn	I, me	C'mon newcomer. Follow me.	行くぞ、新入り！オレに続け！
つづける	続ける	v1, vt, aux-v	to continue, to keep up, to keep on	C'mon newcomer. Follow me.	行くぞ、新入り！オレに続け！
さすが	流石	adj-na, adv, adj-no	as one would expect,still, all the same,even... (e.g. "even a genius...")	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
ソル		n	Sol	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
ジャー		n	vacuum bottle, thermos,jar	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
かみ	神	n	god, deity, divinity, spirit, kami,incredible, fantastic, amazing,[object Object],thunder	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
うすもの	薄物	n	lightweight fabric or clothing, silk gauze, thin silk,Latin (language)	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
しん	信	ctr	honesty, sincerity, fidelity,trust, reliance, confidence,(religious) faith, devotion,counter for received messages	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
グループ		n	group (usu. of people)	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
さんか	参加	n, vs, adj-no	participation	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
する	為る	aux-v, vs-i	to do, to carry out, to perform,to cause to become, to make (into), to turn (into),to serve as, to act as, to work as,to wear (clothes, a facial expression, etc.),to judge as being, to view as being, to think of as, to treat as, to use as,to decide on, to choose,to be sensed (of a smell, noise, etc.),to be (in a state, condition, etc.),to be worth, to cost,to pass (of time), to elapse,to place, or raise, person A to a post or status B,to transform A to B, to make A into B, to exchange A for B,to make use of A for B, to view A as B, to handle A as if it were B,to feel A about B,verbalizing suffix (applies to nouns noted in this dictionary with the part of speech "vs"),creates a humble verb (after a noun prefixed with "o" or "go"),to be just about to, to be just starting to, to try to, to attempt to	Wow! You used to be in SOLDIER all right! …Not everyday ya find one in a group like AVALANCHE.	さすが、ソルジャー！でもよ、反神羅（しんら）グループ【アバランチ】にソルジャーが参加するなんてスゲエよな！
はなし	話	n	talk, speech, chat, story, conversation,discussions, negotiation, argument	SOLDIER? Aren't they the enemy?	その話って本当だったの？ソルジャーって言ったら私たちの敵でしょ？
ほんとう	本当	adj-no, adj-na, adv	truth, reality, actuality, fact,proper, right, correct, official,genuine, authentic, natural, veritable	SOLDIER? Aren't they the enemy?	その話って本当だったの？ソルジャーって言ったら私たちの敵でしょ？
いう	言う	v5u	to say, to utter, to declare,to name, to call,to go (e.g. "the alarm went ping"), to make a noise	SOLDIER? Aren't they the enemy?	その話って本当だったの？ソルジャーって言ったら私たちの敵でしょ？
わたし	私	n, adj-no	I, me,private affairs, personal matter, secrecy,selfishness	SOLDIER? Aren't they the enemy?	その話って本当だったの？ソルジャーって言ったら私たちの敵でしょ？
てき	敵	n	opponent, rival, adversary,menace, danger, threat, enemy	SOLDIER? Aren't they the enemy?	その話って本当だったの？ソルジャーって言ったら私たちの敵でしょ？
どうして	如何して	adv, int	why?, for what reason, how, in what way, for what purpose, what for	What's he doing with us in AVALANCHE?	どうして、そのソルジャーが私たちアバランチに協力するわけ？
きょうりょく	協力	n, vs, adj-no	cooperation, collaboration	What's he doing with us in AVALANCHE?	どうして、そのソルジャーが私たちアバランチに協力するわけ？
わけ	訳	n	conclusion from reasoning, judgement or calculation based on something read or heard, reason, cause, meaning, circumstances, situation	What's he doing with us in AVALANCHE?	どうして、そのソルジャーが私たちアバランチに協力するわけ？
はやとちり	早とちり	n, vs	jumping to a wrong conclusion	He WAS in SOLDIER, Jessie.	早とちりするな、ジェシー。元、ソルジャーなんだってさ
ん		prt	yes, yeah, uh huh,huh?, what?,not,'s,at (place, time), in, on, during	He WAS in SOLDIER, Jessie.	早とちりするな、ジェシー。元、ソルジャーなんだってさ
いま	今	n-adv, n	now, the present time, just now, soon, immediately, (one) more	But he quit and is with us now.	今はもう神羅（しんら）をやめちまって俺たちの仲間ってわけさ
もう		int	now, soon, shortly, before long, presently,already, yet, by now, (not) anymore,further, more, again, another, the other,tsk, dammit, jeez, come on	But he quit and is with us now.	今はもう神羅（しんら）をやめちまって俺たちの仲間ってわけさ
やめる	止める	v1, vt	to stop (an activity), to cease, to discontinue, to end, to quit,to cancel, to abandon, to give up, to abolish, to abstain, to refrain	But he quit and is with us now.	今はもう神羅（しんら）をやめちまって俺たちの仲間ってわけさ
ちまう		v5u	to do something completely	But he quit and is with us now.	今はもう神羅（しんら）をやめちまって俺たちの仲間ってわけさ
なかま	仲間	n	company, fellow, colleague, associate, comrade, mate, group, circle of friends, partner,member of the same category	But he quit and is with us now.	今はもう神羅（しんら）をやめちまって俺たちの仲間ってわけさ
わける	分ける	v1, vt	to divide (into), to split (into), to part, to separate, to divide up, to classify, to sort out, to divide out,to share, to distribute, to deal out, to dish out,to distinguish, to discriminate, to differentiate (between),to break up (a fight), to mediate,to call a draw, to tie,to push one's way through (a crowd),to sell	But he quit and is with us now.	今はもう神羅（しんら）をやめちまって俺たちの仲間ってわけさ
まだ	未だ	adj-na	as yet, hitherto, only, still,not yet,more, besides,unfinished, incomplete, not yet finished with	Didn't catch your name…	まだ名前聞いてなかったよな。教えてくれ
なまえ	名前	n	name, full name,given name, first name	Didn't catch your name…	まだ名前聞いてなかったよな。教えてくれ
きく	聞く	v5k, vt	to hear,to listen (e.g. to music),to ask, to enquire, to query,to learn of, to hear about,to follow (advice), to comply with,to smell (esp. incense), to sample fragrance	Didn't catch your name…	まだ名前聞いてなかったよな。教えてくれ
てる	照る	v5r, vi	to shine,to look slightly upward (of a noh mask; indicating joy, etc.)	Didn't catch your name…	まだ名前聞いてなかったよな。教えてくれ
おしえる	教える	v1, vt	to teach, to instruct,to tell, to inform,to preach	Didn't catch your name…	まだ名前聞いてなかったよな。教えてくれ
くれる	暮れる	v1, vi	to get dark, to grow dark,to end (of a day, year, season, etc.), to come to an end, to close,to be sunk in (e.g. despair), to be lost in (e.g. thought), to be overcome with	Didn't catch your name…	まだ名前聞いてなかったよな。教えてくれ
あんた	貴方	pn	you	I don't care what your names are. Once this job's over…I'm outta here.	あんたたちの名前なんて興味ないね。どうせこの仕事が終わったらお別れだ
きょうみ	興味	n	interest (in something), curiosity (about something), zest (for)	I don't care what your names are. Once this job's over…I'm outta here.	あんたたちの名前なんて興味ないね。どうせこの仕事が終わったらお別れだ
どうせ		adv	anyhow, in any case, at any rate, after all, at all, no matter what,at best, at most	I don't care what your names are. Once this job's over…I'm outta here.	あんたたちの名前なんて興味ないね。どうせこの仕事が終わったらお別れだ
しごと	仕事	n, vs, adj-no	work, job, business, occupation, employment, vocation, task,work	I don't care what your names are. Once this job's over…I'm outta here.	あんたたちの名前なんて興味ないね。どうせこの仕事が終わったらお別れだ
おわる	終わる	v5r, vi, aux-v	to finish, to end, to close	I don't care what your names are. Once this job's over…I'm outta here.	あんたたちの名前なんて興味ないね。どうせこの仕事が終わったらお別れだ
わかれ	別れ	n	parting, separation, farewell, (lateral) branch, fork, offshoot, division, section	I don't care what your names are. Once this job's over…I'm outta here.	あんたたちの名前なんて興味ないね。どうせこの仕事が終わったらお別れだ
やる	遣る	aux-v, v5r	to do, to undertake, to perform, to play (a game), to study,to send, to dispatch, to despatch,to put, to move, to turn (one's head, glance, etc.),to give (esp. to someone of equal or lower status), to let have, to present, to bestow, to confer,to make (a vehicle) go faster,to run (a business), to keep, to be engaged in, to practice (law, medicine, etc.), to practise,to have (food, drink, etc.), to eat, to drink, to smoke,to hold (a performance), to perform, to show,to ease (one's mind),to harm, to injure, to kill,to have sex with,to live, to get by, to get along,to do ... completely,to do ... broadly, to do ... to a great distance,to do ... for (someone of equal or lower status), to do ... to (sometimes with negative nuance),to make active efforts to ...	The hell you all doin'!? I thought I told you never to move in a group!	なにやってんだオマエたち！かたまって行動するなって言ってんだろ！
かたまる	固まる	v5r, vi	to harden, to solidify,to become firm, to become certain,to gather (together), to assemble, to huddle together	The hell you all doin'!? I thought I told you never to move in a group!	なにやってんだオマエたち！かたまって行動するなって言ってんだろ！
こうどう	行動	n, vs, adj-no	action, conduct, behaviour, behavior, mobilization, mobilisation	The hell you all doin'!? I thought I told you never to move in a group!	なにやってんだオマエたち！かたまって行動するなって言ってんだろ！
なる	生る	v5r, vi	to bear fruit	The hell you all doin'!? I thought I told you never to move in a group!	なにやってんだオマエたち！かたまって行動するなって言ってんだろ！
ターゲット		n	target	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
いち	一	n	one,best,first, foremost,beginning, start,ace (playing card),bottom string (on a shamisen, etc.)	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
ばん	番	n	number (in a series),(one's) turn,watch, guard, lookout,bout, match	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
ま	魔	n-suf	demon, devil, evil spirit, evil influence,someone who (habitually) performs some (negative) act	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
ろ	炉	n	hearth, fireplace,furnace, kiln	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
こうる	梱る	v5r, vt	to pack, to box, to package	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
さき	先	n, adj-no, n-suf, pref	previous, prior, former, first, earlier, some time ago, preceding,point (e.g. pencil), tip, end, nozzle,head (of a line), front,ahead, the other side,the future, hereafter,destination,the other party	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
ブリッジ		n	bridge	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
しゅうごう	集合	n, vs, adj-no	gathering, assembly, meeting,set	Our target's the North Mako Reactor. We'll meet on the bridge in front of it.	ターゲットは壱番魔晄炉（まこうろ）。魔晄炉前のブリッジに集合だぞ
しんよう	信用	n	confidence, trust, faith, reputation,credit (finance)	Ex-SOLDIER, huh? I don't trust ya!	元ソルジャー……。チッ、信用できねえな
できる	出来る	v1, vi	to be able (in a position) to do, to be up to the task,to be ready, to be completed,to be made, to be built,to be good at, to be permitted (to do),to become intimate, to take up (with somebody),to grow, to be raised,to become pregnant	Ex-SOLDIER, huh? I don't trust ya!	元ソルジャー……。チッ、信用できねえな
キャンセル		n, vs	cancellation	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
ボタン	釦	n	button	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
しょき	初期	n, adj-no	early (days), initial stage,initial	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
じょうたい	状態	n	current status, condition, situation, circumstances, state	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
おす	押す	v5s, vt	to push, to press,to apply pressure from above, to press down,to stamp (i.e. a passport), to apply a seal,to affix (e.g. gold leaf),to press (someone for something), to urge, to compel, to influence,to overwhelm, to overpower, to repress,to push (events along), to advance (a plan),to do in spite of ..., to do even though ..., to force,to make sure,to be pressed for time,to advance troops, to attack,(of light) to be diffused across an entire surface	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
ほうこう	方向	n	direction, orientation, bearing, way,course (e.g. of action)	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
はしる	走る	v5r, vi	to run,to travel (movement of vehicles), to drive, to flow (e.g. energy),to hurry to,to retreat (from battle), to take flight,to run away from home,to elope,to tend heavily toward,to flash, to streak, to shoot through (e.g. pain)	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
こと	琴	n	koto (13-stringed Japanese zither),stringed instrument,zheng (Chinese zither), guzheng	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
おくれる	遅れる	v1, vi	to be late, to be delayed, to fall behind schedule, to be overdue	Press the Directional buttons while pushing [CANCEL] to run.	【キャンセル】ボタン（初期状態では×）を押しながら方向ボタンを押せば速く走ることができる。遅れずについてこい！
だっしゅつ	脱出	n, vs, adj-no	escape, break-out,prolapse, proptosis	I'll secure our escape passage. You concentrate on the mission, CLOUD.	俺は脱出口を確保しておくっす！
くち	口	suf, ctr	mouth,opening, hole, gap, orifice,mouth (of a bottle), spout, nozzle, mouthpiece,gate, door, entrance, exit,speaking, speech, talk (i.e. gossip),taste, palate,mouth (to feed),opening (i.e. vacancy), available position,invitation, summons,kind, sort, type,opening (i.e. beginning),counter for mouthfuls, shares (of money), and swords	I'll secure our escape passage. You concentrate on the mission, CLOUD.	俺は脱出口を確保しておくっす！
かくほ	確保	n, vs	guarantee, maintain, ensure, insure, secure, reservation	I'll secure our escape passage. You concentrate on the mission, CLOUD.	俺は脱出口を確保しておくっす！
おく	置く	v5k, aux-v	to put, to place,to leave (behind),to establish (an organization, a facility, a position, etc.), to set up,to appoint (someone to a certain position), to hire, to employ,to place (one's trust, one's faith, etc), to bear (in mind etc),to put down a tool (e.g. a pen) hence stopping what one is doing with that tool,to take in (boarders, etc.), to provide lodging in one's house,to separate spatially or temporally,to do something in advance,to leave something in a certain state, to keep something in a certain state	I'll secure our escape passage. You concentrate on the mission, CLOUD.	俺は脱出口を確保しておくっす！
しっか	失火	n, vs	accidental fire, fire caused by negligence,misfire, failure to ignite	Geez, we're really gonna blow this huge furnace up? This'll be somethin' to see!	しっかし、この大きな魔晄炉（まこうろ）を爆破するなんて……みものっすね！
ばくは	爆破	n, vs	destructive blast, blowing up, explosion	Geez, we're really gonna blow this huge furnace up? This'll be somethin' to see!	しっかし、この大きな魔晄炉（まこうろ）を爆破するなんて……みものっすね！
もの	者	n	person	Geez, we're really gonna blow this huge furnace up? This'll be somethin' to see!	しっかし、この大きな魔晄炉（まこうろ）を爆破するなんて……みものっすね！
そこ	底	n	bottom, sole	Push that button over there!	さ、そこのボタンを押して！
うち	内	pn	inside, within,while,among, amongst, between,we, our,my spouse,imperial palace grounds,emperor,I, me	Now let's go into the reactor! From here on out, you stick with me.	さあ、魔晄炉（まこうろ）の中へ！ここからはオレのそばにいてもらうぜ
ここ	個々	n, adj-no	individual, one by one, separate	Now let's go into the reactor! From here on out, you stick with me.	さあ、魔晄炉（まこうろ）の中へ！ここからはオレのそばにいてもらうぜ
そば	側	n	near, close, beside, vicinity, proximity, besides, while,third person	Now let's go into the reactor! From here on out, you stick with me.	さあ、魔晄炉（まこうろ）の中へ！ここからはオレのそばにいてもらうぜ
いる	入る	v5r, vi	to get in, to go in, to come in, to flow into, to set, to set in	Now let's go into the reactor! From here on out, you stick with me.	さあ、魔晄炉（まこうろ）の中へ！ここからはオレのそばにいてもらうぜ
もらう	貰う	v5u, vt	to receive, to take, to accept,to get somebody to do something,to have in one's pocket (a fight, match)	Now let's go into the reactor! From here on out, you stick with me.	さあ、魔晄炉（まこうろ）の中へ！ここからはオレのそばにいてもらうぜ
まく	巻く	v5k, vi	to wind, to coil, to roll, to wear (e.g. turban, scarf),to envelope, to shroud,to outflank, to skirt,to link (verse),to move ahead (three hours, etc.), to move up	Leave this to me!	ここはまかせとき！
せまる	迫る	v5r, vt	to approach, to draw near, to be imminent,to press (someone for something), to urge, to compel	Leave this to me!	ここはまかせとき！
とき	時	n	time, hour, moment,occasion, case,chance, opportunity, season,the times, the age, the day,tense	Leave this to me!	ここはまかせとき！
たのむ	頼む	v5m, vt	to request, to beg, to ask,to call, to order, to reserve,to entrust to,to rely on	Don't mess up SOLDIER-boy!	たのんだぜソルジャーさんよ！
さん	酸	n	acid,sourness, sour taste	Don't mess up SOLDIER-boy!	たのんだぜソルジャーさんよ！
よろしく	宜しく	exp, adv	well, properly, suitably,best regards, please remember me, please treat me favorably (favourably), please take care of, please do,just like ..., as though one were ...,by all means, of course	Bring BARRET back alive!	BARRETをよろしくな！
はじめて	初めて	adv	for the first time,only after ... is it ..., only when ... do you ...	Yo! This your first time in a reactor?	……おい。おまえ魔晄炉（まこうろ）は初めてじゃないんだろ？
まあ		int	just (e.g. "just wait here"), come now, now, now,tolerably, passably, moderately, reasonably, fairly, rather, somewhat,well..., I think..., it would seem..., you might say..., Hmmm, I guess so...,oh!, oh dear!, oh, my!, wow!, goodness gracious!, good heavens!	No. After all, I did work for Shinra, y'know.	まあな。ソルジャー……神羅（しんら）カンパニーの人間だったからな
カンパニー		n	company (i.e. business),company (i.e. group of friends)	No. After all, I did work for Shinra, y'know.	まあな。ソルジャー……神羅（しんら）カンパニーの人間だったからな
にんげん	人間	n	human being, person, man, mankind, humankind,character (of a person)	No. After all, I did work for Shinra, y'know.	まあな。ソルジャー……神羅（しんら）カンパニーの人間だったからな
ほし	星	n	star, any light-emitting (or reflecting) heavenly body (except for the sun and the moon),offender, perpetrator,star point (in go), hoshi, [object Object],circular symbol (said to be shaped like a shining star),bullseye,one's star (out of the nine stars), [object Object],small dot, spot,point, score	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
エネルギー		n	energy,strength, power, stamina, get-up-and-go,food energy, calories	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
みちる	満ちる	v1, vi	to be full,to wax (e.g. moon),to rise (e.g. tide),to mature, to expire	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
じゅうみん	住民	n	inhabitant, resident, citizen, population	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
つかう	使う	v5u, vt	to use (a thing, method, etc.), to make use of, to put to use,to use (a person, animal, puppet, etc.), to employ, to handle, to manage, to manipulate,to use (time, money, etc.), to spend, to consume,to use (language), to speak	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
ひび	日々	n-adv, n-t	every day, daily, day after day, days (e.g. good old days)	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
せいかつ	生活	n, vs	living, life (one's daily existence), livelihood	The Planet's full of Mako energy. People here use it everyday.	この星は魔晄（まこう）エネルギーに満ちている。住民はその魔晄エネルギーを使って日々生活している
だれ	誰	pn	who	However, nobody knows the truth about Mako. Do you know?	でも誰も魔晄の本質を知らねえんだ。おまえ、知ってるか？
ほんしつ	本質	n, adj-no	essence, true nature, substance, reality	However, nobody knows the truth about Mako. Do you know?	でも誰も魔晄の本質を知らねえんだ。おまえ、知ってるか？
しる	知る	v5r, vt	to be aware of, to know, to be conscious of, to cognize, to cognise,to notice, to feel,to understand, to comprehend, to grasp,to remember, to be acquainted with (a procedure),to experience, to go through, to learn,to be acquainted with (a person), to get to know,to concern	However, nobody knows the truth about Mako. Do you know?	でも誰も魔晄の本質を知らねえんだ。おまえ、知ってるか？
ながれる	流れる	v1, vi	to stream, to flow (liquid, time, etc.), to run (ink),to be washed away, to be carried,to drift, to float (e.g. clouds), to wander, to stray,to sweep (e.g. rumour, fire), to spread, to circulate,to be heard (e.g. music), to be played,to lapse (e.g. into indolence, despair),to pass, to elapse, to be transmitted,to be called off, to be forfeited,to disappear, to be removed	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
ち	血	n	blood, consanguinity	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
それ	其れ	pn	that (indicating an item or person near the listener, the action of the listener, or something on their mind), it,that time, then,there (indicating a place near the listener),you	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
かいしゃ	会社	n	company, corporation,workplace	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
ガンガン		adv, adv-to	clanging, banging, booming, loudly,throbbing (headache), pounding, splitting,fully, vigorously, hard (e.g. working), flat out	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
すいだす	吸い出す	v5s, vt	to suck (or draw) out, to aspirate	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
いやがる	嫌がる	v5r, vt	to hate, to dislike	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
へんちくりん	変ちくりん	n, adj-na	strange, weird, queer	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
スクラップ		n, vs	scrap	It's the life blood of this Planet. But Shinra keeps suckin' the blood out with these weird machines.	魔晄はこの星を流れる血だ。それを神羅（しんら）って会社はガンガン吸い出していやがる。このへんちくりんなスクラップでな……
のうがき	能書き	n	advertising the excellence of one's wares, boasting, self-advertisement,statement of the virtues of a medicine, description of the virtues of a drug	I'm not here for a lecture. Let's just do it.	能書きはいい。先を急ごう
いそぐ	急ぐ	v5g, vi, vt	to hurry, to rush, to hasten, to make something happen sooner	I'm not here for a lecture. Let's just do it.	能書きはいい。先を急ごう
いっしょ	一緒	n-adv, n, adj-no	together,at the same time,same, identical	From now on you come with me.	よし、ここからはオレといっしょに行動してもらうぜ
せい	姓	n	surname, family name,hereditary title (used in ancient Japan to denote rank and political standing)	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
いのち	命	n	life, life force,lifetime, lifespan,most important thing, foundation, core,paired tattoos of the "life" kanji on the upper arms of a man and woman (indicating unwavering love),fate, destiny, karma	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
まいにち	毎日	n-adv, n-t	every day	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
けずる	削る	v5r, vt	to shave (wood, leather, etc.), to sharpen (e.g. pencil), to plane, to whittle, to pare, to scrape off, to erode,to cut down (budget, expenses, staff, time, etc.), to curtail, to reduce,to delete, to erase, to remove, to cross out, to strike out	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
れる		aux-v, v1	indicates passive voice (incl. the "suffering passive"),indicates the potential form,indicates spontaneous occurrence,used as an honorific for others' actions	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
いつ	何時	n-adv	when, how soon	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
ひ	日	n-adv, n-t	day, days,sun, sunshine, sunlight,case (esp. unfortunate), event	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
れい	零	n, adj-no	zero, nought	Little by little the reactors'll drain out all the life. Then that'll be that.	魔晄炉（まこうろ）のせいで、この星の命は毎日けずられていく。そしていつの日か……ゼロだ
しぬ	死ぬ	v5n, vn, vi	to die, to pass away,to lose spirit, to lose vigor, to look dead,to cease, to stop	The planet's dyin', CLOUD!	星が死んじまうんだぞ。えっ、CLOUDさんよ！
かんがえる	考える	v1, vt	to think (about, of), to think over, to ponder, to contemplate, to reflect (on), to meditate (on),to consider, to bear in mind, to allow for, to take into consideration,to think (that), to believe, to hold (a view), to judge, to conclude, to suspect,to intend (to do), to think of (doing), to plan,to predict, to anticipate, to expect, to imagine,to come up with, to think up, to contrive, to devise,to consider (as), to regard (as), to look on (as), to take, to view	The only thing I care about is finishin' this job before security and the Roboguards come.	俺が考えてるのは、さっさと仕事を終わらせたいってことだけだ。警備兵やガードロボットが来ないうちにな
けいび	警備	n, vs	defense, defence, guard, policing, security	The only thing I care about is finishin' this job before security and the Roboguards come.	俺が考えてるのは、さっさと仕事を終わらせたいってことだけだ。警備兵やガードロボットが来ないうちにな
いくさ	戦	n	war, battle, campaign, fight,troops, forces	The only thing I care about is finishin' this job before security and the Roboguards come.	俺が考えてるのは、さっさと仕事を終わらせたいってことだけだ。警備兵やガードロボットが来ないうちにな
ガード		n	guard,girder bridge	The only thing I care about is finishin' this job before security and the Roboguards come.	俺が考えてるのは、さっさと仕事を終わらせたいってことだけだ。警備兵やガードロボットが来ないうちにな
ロボット		n	robot,(mere) puppet, pawn, figurehead	The only thing I care about is finishin' this job before security and the Roboguards come.	俺が考えてるのは、さっさと仕事を終わらせたいってことだけだ。警備兵やガードロボットが来ないうちにな
くる	来る	vk, vi	to come (spatially or temporally), to approach, to arrive,to come back, to do ... and come back,to come to be, to become, to get, to grow, to continue,to come from, to be caused by, to derive from,to come to (i.e. "when it comes to spinach ...")	The only thing I care about is finishin' this job before security and the Roboguards come.	俺が考えてるのは、さっさと仕事を終わらせたいってことだけだ。警備兵やガードロボットが来ないうちにな
コード		n	code,cord,chord	Code deciphered	コード解除
かいじょ	解除	n, vs	cancellation, rescinding, release, calling off, lifting (sanctions), delisting	Code deciphered	コード解除
だいじょうぶ	大丈夫	n	safe, secure, sound, problem-free, without fear, all right, alright, OK, okay,certainly, surely, undoubtedly,no thanks, I'm good, that's alright,great man, fine figure of a man	You all right?	だいじょうぶか？
うかつ	迂闊	adj-na	careless, stupid, thoughtless, heedless, unobservant, inadvertent, incautious	My leg got stuck.	うかつ！！　足がはさまって……
あし	足	n	foot,leg,gait,pace,bottom structural component (i.e. radical) of a kanji,means of transportation,money, coin	My leg got stuck.	うかつ！！　足がはさまって……
はさまる	挟まる	v5r, vi	to get between, to be caught in	My leg got stuck.	うかつ！！　足がはさまって……
うしろ	後ろ	n, adj-no	back, behind, rear	I only let my guard down for a minute… And someone got behind me…	敵に後ろをとられて……油断しちまった
とる	撮る	v5r, vt	to take (a photo),to record (video, audio, etc.), to make (a film)	I only let my guard down for a minute… And someone got behind me…	敵に後ろをとられて……油断しちまった
ゆだん	油断	n, vs	negligence, carelessness, inattention, unpreparedness	I only let my guard down for a minute… And someone got behind me…	敵に後ろをとられて……油断しちまった
ドア		n	door (Western-style)	Biggs and I got the code for this door.	私とビッグスがここのドアロックの暗号を手にいれたの
ロック		n	lock,rock,roc	Biggs and I got the code for this door.	私とビッグスがここのドアロックの暗号を手にいれたの
あんごう	暗号	n, adj-no	code, password, cipher	Biggs and I got the code for this door.	私とビッグスがここのドアロックの暗号を手にいれたの
て	手	n, n-suf, ctr	hand, arm,forepaw, foreleg,handle,hand, worker, help,trouble, care, effort,means, way, trick, move, technique, workmanship,hand, handwriting,kind, type, sort,one's hands, one's possession,ability to cope,hand (of cards),direction,move (in go, shogi, etc.)	Biggs and I got the code for this door.	私とビッグスがここのドアロックの暗号を手にいれたの
いれる	入れる	v1, vt	to put in, to let in, to take in, to bring in, to insert, to set (a jewel, etc.), to ink in (e.g. a tattoo),to admit, to accept, to employ, to hire,to accept, to comply, to grant, to adopt (a policy, etc.), to take (advice, etc.), to listen to, to pay attention to,to include,to pay (one's rent, etc.),to cast (a vote),to make (tea, coffee, etc.),to turn on (a switch, etc.),to send (a fax), to call	Biggs and I got the code for this door.	私とビッグスがここのドアロックの暗号を手にいれたの
にゅうしゅ	入手	n, vs	acquisition, obtaining, coming to hand	Think how many of our people risked their lives, just for this code…	ここの暗号を入手するために何人の仲間が犠牲になったことか……
ため	為	n	good, advantage, benefit, welfare,sake, purpose, objective, aim,consequence, result, effect,affecting, regarding, concerning	Think how many of our people risked their lives, just for this code…	ここの暗号を入手するために何人の仲間が犠牲になったことか……
じん	人	suf	-ian (e.g. Italian), -ite (e.g. Tokyoite),-er (e.g. performer, etc.), person working with ...,man, person, people	Think how many of our people risked their lives, just for this code…	ここの暗号を入手するために何人の仲間が犠牲になったことか……
ぎせい	犠牲	n	sacrifice, victim, scapegoat,sacrifice (to the gods)	Think how many of our people risked their lives, just for this code…	ここの暗号を入手するために何人の仲間が犠牲になったことか……
はしご	梯子	n, vs	ladder,stairs,going to several places in succession (e.g. barhopping)	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
けってい	決定	n, vs	decision, determination	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
そう		adj-na, suf	so, really, seeming,appearing that, seeming that, looking like, having the appearance of	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
つかまる	捕まる	v5r, vi	to be caught, to be arrested,to hold on to, to grasp,to find (e.g. proof), to get (e.g. a taxi),to be detained by	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
あと	後	n, adj-no	behind, rear,after, later,after one's death,remainder, the rest,descendant, successor, heir,more (e.g. five more minutes), left,also, in addition,past, previous	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
キー		n	key (lock, keyboard, piano, clue, island, cay, etc.)	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
じょうげ	上下	n	top and bottom, high and low, above and below, upper and lower ends, up and down,going up and down, rising and falling, fluctuating,going and coming back,upper and lower classes, ruler and ruled, the government and the people,first and second volumes	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
のぼる	上る	v5r, vi	to ascend, to go up, to climb,to ascend (as a natural process, e.g. the sun), to rise,to go to (the capital),to be promoted,to add up to,to advance (in price),to swim up (a river), to sail up,to come up (on the agenda)	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
おる	居る	v5r, aux-v	to be (animate), to be, to exist,to be ..ing,to (have the audacity to) do	Push [OK] in front of a ladder to grab on to it. Then use the [Directional button] to climb up and down.	はしごの前では【決定ボタン】を押して。そうすればはしごにつかまるわ。後は【方向キー】の上下で、のぼりおりするの
ちょうし	調子	n	tune, tone, key, pitch, time, rhythm,vein, mood, way, manner, style, knack,condition, state of health,impetus, spur of the moment, strain,trend	There you go!	そう、その調子！
あせる	焦る	v5r, vi	to be in a hurry, to be impatient, to be flustered, to lose one's presence of mind, to be surprised	Alright, be careful.	さ、あせらないで
あがる	上がる	suf, v5r	to rise, to go up, to come up, to ascend, to be raised,to enter (esp. from outdoors), to come in, to go in,to enter (a school), to advance to the next grade,to get out (of water), to come ashore,to increase,to improve, to make progress,to be promoted, to advance,to be made (of profit, etc.),to occur (esp. of a favourable result),to be adequate (to cover expenses, etc.),to be finished, to be done, to be over,(of rain) to stop, to lift,to stop (working properly), to cut out, to give out, to die,to win (in a card game, etc.),to be arrested,to turn up (of evidence, etc.),to be deep fried,to be spoken loudly,to get stage fright,to be offered (to the gods, etc.),to go, to visit,to eat, to drink,to be listed (as a candidate),to serve (in one's master's home),to go north,to be complete, to finish	Jessie still isn't back yet!	ジェシーがまだあがって来てないんだ！
こわす	壊す	v5s, vt	to break, to destroy, to demolish,to wreck, to ruin, to spoil, to damage,to break (a bill, etc.)	When we blow this place, this ain't gonna be nothin' more than a hunka junk.	ここもブッ壊しちまえばただのガラクタだぜ
ただ	只	conj	ordinary, common, usual,free of charge,unaffected, as is, safe,only, merely, just, simply,but, however, nevertheless	When we blow this place, this ain't gonna be nothin' more than a hunka junk.	ここもブッ壊しちまえばただのガラクタだぜ
ばくだん	爆弾	n	bomb,alcohol with liquor added (esp. wine-based shochu highball, also beer with whiskey)	CLOUD, you set the bomb.	CLOUDさんよこの爆弾をセットしてくれ
セット		n, vs	set,set meal, combo-meal, combo, combination meal,hairdo	CLOUD, you set the bomb.	CLOUDさんよこの爆弾をセットしてくれ
ほう	方	n	direction, way, side, area (in a particular direction),side (of an argument, etc.), one's part,type, category,field (of study, etc.),indicates one side of a comparison,way, method, manner, means,length (of each side of a square)	Shouldn't you do it?	あんたがやったほうがいいんじゃないのか？
みはる	見張る	v5r, vt	to stand watch, to stand guard, to look out,to open one's eyes wide	Jus' do it! I gotta watch to make sure you don't pull nothin'.	オレ？　オレは見張らせてもらう。おまえさんがおかしなマネをしないようにな
まね	真似	n, vs	imitating, copying, mimicry,behavior, behaviour, action, conduct	Jus' do it! I gotta watch to make sure you don't pull nothin'.	オレ？　オレは見張らせてもらう。おまえさんがおかしなマネをしないようにな
かたち	形	n	form, shape, figure,visage	Jus' do it! I gotta watch to make sure you don't pull nothin'.	オレ？　オレは見張らせてもらう。おまえさんがおかしなマネをしないようにな
すき	好き	n, adj-na	liked, well-liked, favourite, favorite,in love (with), loved, romantically interested (in),faddism, eccentricity,the way one likes, (as) it suits one	Fine, be my guest.	……好きにしてくれ
め	目	suf	eye, eyeball,eyesight, sight, vision,look, stare, gaze, glance,notice, attention, observation, eyes (of the world, public, etc.),an experience,viewpoint,discrimination, discernment, judgement, eye (e.g. for quality),appearance,spacing (between crossed strands of a net, mesh, etc.), opening, stitch, texture, weave,grain (of wood),eye (of a storm, needle, etc.),intersection (on a go board), square (on a chess board),dot (on a dice), pip, rolled number,graduation, division (of a scale),tooth (of a saw, comb, etc.),ordinal number suffix,somewhat, -ish,point (e.g. of change)	Watch out!	目をさませ！
さます	覚ます	v5s, vt	to awaken, to arouse from sleep,to bring to one's senses, to disabuse (someone of),to sober up,to dampen, to throw a damper on, to spoil	Watch out!	目をさませ！
はつでん	発電	n, vs	generation (e.g. power),sending a telegram, telegraphing	This isn't just a reactor!!	ここはただの発電所じゃない！！
ところ	所	n	place, spot, scene, site,address,district, area, locality,one's house,point, aspect, side, facet,passage (in text), part,space, room,thing, matter,whereupon, as a result,about to, on the verge of,was just doing, was in the process of doing, have just done, just finished doing	This isn't just a reactor!!	ここはただの発電所じゃない！！
うし	牛	n	cattle (Bos taurus), cow, bull, ox, calf,beef,Chinese "Ox" constellation (one of the 28 mansions)	What's wrong?	…………うした？
どう	如何	adv	how, in what way, how about	What's wrong, CLOUD? Hurry it up!	どうしたCLOUDさんよ？早くしてくれ！
すむ	済む	v5m, vi	to finish, to end, to be completed,to merely result in something less severe than expected,to feel at ease,to feel unease or guilt for troubling someone, to be sorry	…Yeah, sorry.	……ああ、すまない
ほんかく	本格	adj-f	original method or procedure,serious, orthodox, classical, genuine	Heads up, here they come!	本格的にやってくるぜ
てき	的	adj-na, suf	-like, typical	Heads up, here they come!	本格的にやってくるぜ
やってくる	やって来る	exp, vk	to come along, to come around, to turn up,to arrive at the present, to get where one is, to have been doing something (for a period of time)	Heads up, here they come!	本格的にやってくるぜ
けいほう	警報	n	alarm, warning	The alarm!	警報か？
これ	此れ	pn	this (indicating an item near the speaker, the action of the speaker, or the current topic),this person (usu. indicating someone in one's in-group),now,here,I (me),certainly	This is… Materia…	これは……マテリア……
ばくはつ	爆発	n, vs	explosion, detonation, eruption	Ten minutes to detonation!	爆発　１０　分前
のこり	残り	n, adj-no	remnant, residue, remaining, left-over	Two minutes remaining	残り　２　分
びょう	秒	n	second (unit of time)	Thirty seconds remaining	残り　３０　秒
しっかり	確り	adv, adv-to, vs	tightly (holding on), firmly, securely,strongly (built), solidly, sturdily, steadily,properly, well, sufficiently, hard (working, etc.), fully, completely,reliably, dependably, levelheadedly, shrewdly, wisely, cleverly	Damn man‚get a hold of yourself!	おい、しっかりしてくれよ！
き	気	n	spirit, mind, heart,nature, disposition,motivation, intention,mood, feelings,ambience, atmosphere, mood	No…forget… Come on‚let's hurry!	い……いや……気にするな。さあ、急ごう！
わかる	分かる	v5r, vi	to understand, to comprehend, to grasp, to see, to get, to follow,to become clear, to be known, to be discovered, to be realized, to be realised, to be found out	I know. You're my chaperon‚ right?	わかってるさ。あんたは俺の見張りだろ？
みはり	見張り	n	watch-keeping, guard, lookout	I know. You're my chaperon‚ right?	わかってるさ。あんたは俺の見張りだろ？
おさななじみ	幼なじみ	n	childhood friend, friend from infancy, old playmate	TIFA's old friend… That ain't good enough.	TIFAの幼なじみ……それだけじゃ不安なんでな
ふあん	不安	adj-na, n	anxiety, uneasiness, insecurity, suspense	TIFA's old friend… That ain't good enough.	TIFAの幼なじみ……それだけじゃ不安なんでな
ちょっと	一寸	int	a little, a bit, slightly,just a minute, for a moment, briefly,somewhat, rather, fairly, pretty, quite,(not) easily, (not) readily,hey!, excuse me	That should keep the planet going… at least a little longer.	星の命……ちょっとはのびたかな
のびる	伸びる	v1, vi	to stretch, to extend, to lengthen, to grow (of hair, height, grass, etc.),to straighten out, to be flattened, to become smooth,to spread (of paint, cream, etc.),to stretch out (e.g. of a hand), to extend,to lose elasticity, to become slack, to become soggy (e.g. noodles),to make progress, to develop, to expand, to increase, to improve,to be exhausted, to be groggy, to pass out, to collapse,to be prolonged (meeting, life span, etc.), to be extended (e.g. deadline), to lengthen (e.g. of the days),to be postponed, to be delayed, to be put off	That should keep the planet going… at least a little longer.	星の命……ちょっとはのびたかな
さがる	下がる	v5r, vi	to come down, to go down, to fall, to drop, to sink, to get lower,to hang, to dangle,to move back, to step back, to withdraw, to retire,to deteriorate, to fall off, to be downgraded,to get closer to the present day,to go south	OK! Now everyone get back.	出来た！下がって
まち	町	n	town, block, neighbourhood, neighborhood,street, road,109.09 m,0.99 hectares,downtown, main street	Sector 8	８番街
ひきあげる	引き上げる	v1, vt	to pull up, to drag up, to lift up,to increase, to raise (e.g. taxes),to withdraw, to leave, to pull out, to retire,to promote (someone to a higher position),to return home,to expedite the schedule	Alright, now let's get out of here.	さあ、引き上げるぞ
ランデブー		n, vs	meeting, rendez-vous,romantic encounter, date	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
ちてん	地点	n	site, point on a map, spot	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
ステーション		n	station	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
かくじ	各自	n, n-adv	each (person), everyone, individual, respective	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
たんどく	単独	n	sole, single, solo,independence, singleness, singularity	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
れっしゃ	列車	n	train, railway train	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
のりこむ	乗り込む	v5m, vi	to board, to embark on, to get into (a car), to man (a ship), to help (someone) into,to march into, to enter	Rendezvous at Sector 8 station! Split up and get on the train!	ランデブー地点は８番街ステーション！各自単独行動、列車に乗りこむんだ！
おうごん	黄金	n, adj-no	gold	If it's about your money, wait 'til we get back.	金の話なら無事にアジトに帰ってからだ
ぶじ	無事	n, adj-na, adj-no	safety, peace, quietness	If it's about your money, wait 'til we get back.	金の話なら無事にアジトに帰ってからだ
アジト		n	hideout, secret base of operations, safe house	If it's about your money, wait 'til we get back.	金の話なら無事にアジトに帰ってからだ
かえる	帰る	v5r, vi	to return, to come home, to go home, to go back,to leave,to get home, to get to home plate	If it's about your money, wait 'til we get back.	金の話なら無事にアジトに帰ってからだ
はな	花	adj-no	flower, blossom, bloom, petal,cherry blossom,beauty,blooming (esp. of cherry blossoms),ikebana,hanafuda,(the) best,glorious, lovely	Flower girl	花売り
うる	売る	v5r, vt	to sell	Flower girl	花売り
ある	有る	v5r-i, vi	to be, to exist, to live,to have,to be located,to be equipped with,to happen, to come about	What happened?	何があったの？
にげる	逃げる	v1, vi	to escape, to run away	You'd better get out of here	逃げたほうがいい
なんだか	何だか	adv	(a) little, somewhat, somehow	Really? I don't know what's going on, but all right.	そうなの！？なんだかわからないけどそうするわね
うつ	撃つ	v5t	to shoot (at),to attack, to defeat, to destroy, to avenge	What! Tell me!	もうっ！気になるなあ
きにいる	気に入る	exp, v5r	to like, to be pleased with, to be delighted with, to take a liking to, to suit one's fancy	Oh, these? Do you like them? They're only one gil.	あっ、これね。気に入ってくれた？１ギルなんだけど、どう？
とく	解く	v5k, vt	to untie, to unfasten, to unwrap, to undo, to unbind, to unpack,to unsew, to unstitch,to solve, to work out, to answer,to dispel (misunderstanding, etc.), to clear up, to remove (suspicion), to appease,to dissolve (a contract), to cancel, to remove (a prohibition), to lift (a ban), to raise (a siege),to release (from duty), to relieve, to dismiss,to comb (out), to card, to untangle (hair)	Forget it	やめとくよ
たった		adj-f, adv	only, merely, but, no more than	Uh, excuse me, would you like to buy some flowers? They're only one gil.	あっ、ねぇ、お花はいらない？たった１ギルよ
がっかり		adv, n, vs, adv-to	feel disappointed, dejected, lose heart, feel emotionally drained, feel let down	Ahh…not again.	……ちょっとがっかり、かな
じこ	事故	n	accident, incident, trouble,circumstances, reasons	Think it's another Mako reactor accident?	ああ、また魔晄炉の事故じゃねぇのか？
いったい	一体	n-adv	(what) the heck, (why) in the world, (who) on earth,one object, one body, unity,one form, one style,one Buddhist image (or carving, etc.),generally, in general	Just what the hell's going on!?	いったい何がおこったって言うのよ
おこる	起こる	v5r, vi	to occur, to happen	Just what the hell's going on!?	いったい何がおこったって言うのよ
かべ	壁	n	wall, partition,barrier, obstacle,Chinese "Wall" constellation (one of the 28 mansions)	Wonder what that is on the wall over there. Let's see…	何か壁に書いてあるな？なに、なに…
かく	書く	v5k, vt	to write, to compose, to pen,to draw, to paint	Wonder what that is on the wall over there. Let's see…	何か壁に書いてあるな？なに、なに…
だます	騙す	v5s, vt	to trick, to cheat, to deceive,to coax, to wheedle, to soothe and humor (humour)	Don't be fooled by Shinra!	神羅にだまされるな！
えいえん	永遠	n, adj-no, adj-na	eternity, perpetuity, permanence, immortality	Mako energy doesn't last forever!	魔晄エネルギーは永遠ではない！
いつか	五日	n	the fifth day of the month,five days	The end is in sight!	いつか終わりがやってくる！
きゅうせいしゅ	救世主	n	saviour, savior, messiah	Protectors of the Planet: AVALANCHE	星の救世主：アバランチ
へいし	兵士	n	soldier	Soldier	兵士
おとこ	男	n	man, male,fellow, guy, chap, bloke,male lover, boyfriend, man,manliness, manly honor, manly honour, manly reputation	Hey! You there!!	おい！　そこの男！！
まつ	待つ	v5t, vt, vi	to wait,to await, to look forward to, to anticipate,to depend on, to need	Halt!!	まて！！
こちら	此方	pn	this way (direction close to the speaker or towards the speaker), this direction,here (place close to the speaker or where the speaker is),this one (something physically close to the speaker),I, me, we, us,this person (someone physically close to the speaker and of equal or higher status)	Over here!!	こっちだ！！
めんどう	面倒	n	trouble, bother,trouble, difficulty,care, attention	What a pain…	めんどうだな…
ざんねん	残念	adj-na, n	deplorable, regrettable, disappointing, vexing, unfortunate	I don't have time to mess around  with you guys.	残念だが、おまえらの相手をしてるほどヒマじゃないんでな
あいて	相手	n	companion, partner, company,other party, addressee,opponent (sports, etc.)	I don't have time to mess around  with you guys.	残念だが、おまえらの相手をしてるほどヒマじゃないんでな
ひま	暇	n	spare time, free time, leisure,time (e.g. time it takes to do something),time off, day off, vacation, holiday, leave,quitting (one's job), firing someone, divorcing (one's spouse),(of one's time) free, (of one's business) slow,leaving, departing	I don't have time to mess around  with you guys.	残念だが、おまえらの相手をしてるほどヒマじゃないんでな
たわごと	戯言	n	nonsense, silly talk, drivel, rubbish	Enough babbling… Grab him!!	たわごとを……よし捕らえろ！！
よし	縦し	adv	even if	Enough babbling… Grab him!!	たわごとを……よし捕らえろ！！
とらえる	捉える	v1, vt	to catch, to capture, to seize, to arrest, to grab, to catch hold of,to grasp (e.g. meaning), to perceive, to capture (e.g. features),to captivate, to move (one's heart)	Enough babbling… Grab him!!	たわごとを……よし捕らえろ！！
ごと	毎	n-adv, n-suf	each, every	What the?	なにごとだ！