やろう	野郎	n, pn	guy, fellow, chap, buddy,bastard, asshole, arsehole, son of a bitch	No way!!	ケッ……！！あの野郎が金ももらわねえでいなくなるわけねえだろ！！
さいご	最後	n	end, conclusion,last, final, latest, most recent,no sooner than, once, right after (often having negative consequences),one's final moments	going to stay on and fight for AVALANCHE!?	最後まで、おれたち…アバランチのために戦ってくれんのか？
たたかう	戦う	v5u, vi	to make war (on), to wage war (against), to go to war (with), to fight (with), to do battle (against),to compete (against),to struggle (against adversities, etc.), to fight, to contend, to resist	going to stay on and fight for AVALANCHE!?	最後まで、おれたち…アバランチのために戦ってくれんのか？
すこし	少し	adv, n	small quantity, little, few, something,little while,short distance	Hmph!! If y'all weren't such screw-ups…	チッ！！おまえらがもうすこしたよりになりゃよ……
たより	便り	n, n-suf, vs	news, tidings, information, correspondence, letter	Hmph!! If y'all weren't such screw-ups…	チッ！！おまえらがもうすこしたよりになりゃよ……
やとう	雇う	v5u, vt	to employ,to hire, to charter	It's better if we don't hire a guy like that.	あんな野郎、やとわねえでもいいんだがな…
きゅうりょう	給料	n	salary, wages, pay	Hey, BARRET! What about our money?	あ、BARRETさん俺たちの給料……
やくそく	約束	n, vs	promise, agreement, arrangement, one's word, contract, pact, appointment, engagement, date,convention, rule,destiny, fate	Looks like I'm a little late.	約束の時間に遅れたようだ
じかん	時間	n	time,hour	Looks like I'm a little late.	約束の時間に遅れたようだ
ちこく	遅刻	n, vs, adj-no	lateness, late coming	You damn right, you're late!!	おい！　遅刻野郎！！
ずいぶん	随分	adj-na	very, extremely, surprisingly, considerably, awfully, terribly,terrible, horrid, contemptible, reprehensible,remarkable, extraordinary	Come waltzin' in here makin' a big scene!	ずいぶん派手なおでましじゃねぇか
はで	派手	adj-na, n	showy, loud, gay, flashy, gaudy	Come waltzin' in here makin' a big scene!	ずいぶん派手なおでましじゃねぇか
でる	出る	v1, vi	to leave, to exit, to go out, to come out, to get out,to leave (on a journey), to depart, to start out, to set out,to move forward,to come to, to get to, to lead to, to reach,to appear, to come out, to emerge, to surface, to come forth, to turn up, to be found, to be detected, to be discovered, to be exposed, to show, to be exhibited, to be on display,to appear (in print), to be published, to be announced, to be issued, to be listed, to come out,to attend, to participate, to take part, to enter (an event), to play in, to perform,to be stated, to be expressed, to come up, to be brought up, to be raised,to sell,to exceed, to go over,to stick out, to protrude,to break out, to occur, to start, to originate,to be produced,to come from, to be derived from,to be given, to get, to receive, to be offered, to be provided, to be presented, to be submitted, to be handed in, to be turned in, to be paid,to answer (phone, door, etc.), to get,to assume (an attitude), to act, to behave,to pick up (speed, etc.), to gain,to flow (e.g. tears), to run, to bleed,to graduate	Come waltzin' in here makin' a big scene!	ずいぶん派手なおでましじゃねぇか
ふつう	不通	n	suspension, interruption, stoppage, tie-up, cessation	It's no big scene. Just what I always do.	そうでもない。ふつうだ
しんぱい	心配	n, vs	worry, concern, anxiety, uneasiness, fear,care, help, aid, assistance	Havin' everyone worried like that. You don't give a damn 'bout no one but yourself!	心配させやがって勝手な野郎だ！
がる		suf, v5r	to show signs of being, to feel, to think,to behave as if one were, to pretend, to act as if,to want, to desire, to be anxious to, to be eager to	Havin' everyone worried like that. You don't give a damn 'bout no one but yourself!	心配させやがって勝手な野郎だ！
かって	勝手	n-pref	one's own convenience, one's way, selfishness,surroundings, environment, way of doing things,convenience, ease of use,financial circumstances, living, livelihood,kitchen,right hand (in archery), hand that pulls the bowstring,unauthorised (e.g. phone app, WWW site), unofficial	Havin' everyone worried like that. You don't give a damn 'bout no one but yourself!	心配させやがって勝手な野郎だ！
ぶん	分	n, n-suf	part, segment, share, ration,rate,degree, one's lot, one's status, relation, duty, kind, lot,relationship, connection, correspondence,in proportion to, just as much as	That's comin' outta your share, hot shot! 	チッ…刻のぶんは報酬からひくからな
ほうしゅう	報酬	n	remuneration, recompense, reward, toll	That's comin' outta your share, hot shot! 	チッ…刻のぶんは報酬からひくからな
ばしょ	場所	n	place, location, spot, position,room, space,basho, [object Object]	We're movin' out! Follow me!	場所変えるぞ。ついてこい！
かえる	変える	v1, vt	to change, to alter, to transform, to convert, to turn, to vary,to reform, to revise, to amend	We're movin' out! Follow me!	場所変えるぞ。ついてこい！
つく	就く	v5k	to ascend (the throne), to accede,to take (seat, position, course, office, etc.), to assume, to be hired, to be employed,to start (on a journey), to commence, to depart,to study (under teacher), to be an apprentice	We're movin' out! Follow me!	場所変えるぞ。ついてこい！
つかれる	疲れる	v1, vi	to get tired, to tire,to be worn out (e.g. of well used objects),to starve	Hey, CLOUD!! You were great back there!	あっ、CLOUDさん！！おつかれっす！
つぎ	次	n, adj-no	next, following, subsequent,stage, station	Heh heh…CLOUD! We'll do even better next time.	へへ……CLOUD！次の作戦も、がんばろうな
さくせん	作戦	n	tactics, strategy,military operation, naval operation	Heh heh…CLOUD! We'll do even better next time.	へへ……CLOUD！次の作戦も、がんばろうな
がんばる	頑張る	v5r, vi	to persevere, to persist, to keep at it, to hang on, to hold out, to do one's best,to insist that, to stick to (one's opinion),to remain in a place, to stick to one's post, to refuse to budge	Heh heh…CLOUD! We'll do even better next time.	へへ……CLOUD！次の作戦も、がんばろうな
しめる	閉める	v1, vt	to close, to shut	Careful, I'll shut this.	あぶないから閉めとくね
かお	顔	n	face, visage,look, expression, countenance,honor, honour, face,influence, notoriety	Oh, CLOUD!! Your face is pitch-black…	やだ！　CLOUD！！顔、まっくろ……
できあがる	出来上がる	v5r, vi	to be completed, to be finished, to be ready (e.g. to serve or eat),to be very drunk	There you go!	はい、できあがり！
たすける	助ける	v1, vt	to save, to rescue,to help, to assist,to support (financially), to contribute (to), to provide aid,to facilitate, to stimulate, to promote, to contribute to	Say, thanks for helping me back there at the reactor!	ね、魔晄炉で助けてくれてありがとう！
れい	礼	n	thanks, gratitude,manners, etiquette,bow,reward, gift,ceremony, ritual	Quit thanking me	礼なんかやめてくれ
かんしゃ	感謝	n, vs	thanks, gratitude	It bugs me when you thank me. It's just a part of my job.	感謝などされても困る。これも仕事のうちだからな
こまる	困る	v5r, vi	to be troubled, to be worried, to be bothered, to be embarrassed, to be stumped	It bugs me when you thank me. It's just a part of my job.	感謝などされても困る。これも仕事のうちだからな
ほんとうに	本当に	adv	really, truly	But, I… I was just glad…	でも、私……ほんとにうれしかったから…
まま	儘	n	as it is, as one likes, because, as,condition, state,sic, sic erat scriptum, [object Object]	Shut-off the switch in this position.	このまま、スイッチをお切りください
スイッチ		n, vs	switch	Shut-off the switch in this position.	このまま、スイッチをお切りください
きる	切る	aux-v, v5r	to cut, to cut through, to perform (surgery),to sever (connections, ties),to turn off (e.g. the light),to terminate (e.g. a conversation), to hang up (the phone), to disconnect,to punch (a ticket), to tear off (a stub),to open (something sealed),to start,to set (a limit), to do (something) in less or within a certain time, to issue (stamps, vouchers, etc.),to reduce, to decrease, to discount,to shake off (water, etc.), to let drip-dry, to let drain,to cross, to traverse,to criticize sharply,to act decisively, to do (something noticeable), to go first, to make (certain facial expressions, in kabuki),to turn (vehicle, steering wheel, etc.),to curl (a ball), to bend, to cut,to shuffle (cards),to discard a tile,to dismiss, to sack, to let go, to expulse, to excommunicate,to dig (a groove), to cut (a stencil, on a mimeograph),to trump,to cut (the connection between two groups) (in go),to start a fire (with wood-wood friction or by striking a metal against stone),to draw (a shape) in the air (with a sword, etc.),to finish, to complete	Shut-off the switch in this position.	このまま、スイッチをお切りください
くださる	下さる	v5aru	to give, to confer, to bestow,to kindly do for one, to oblige, to favour, to favor	Shut-off the switch in this position.	このまま、スイッチをお切りください
イベント		n	event	We can escape from the train event…	列車イベントをぬけるのだが……
ぬける	抜ける	v1, vt	to come out, to fall out, to be omitted, to be missing, to escape, to come loose,to fade, to discolour,to wear a hole (e.g. clothes),to leave (e.g. a meeting),to be clear, to be transparent (e.g. of the sky),to be stupid, to be absentminded, to be careless, to be inattentive,to exit (a program loop),to go through, to pass through	We can escape from the train event…	列車イベントをぬけるのだが……
せいこう	成功	n, vs	success, hit	Did it!!	大成功！！
しっぱい	失敗	n, adj-no, vs	failure, mistake, blunder	4th failure	失敗４回目
かい	回	n	counter for occurrences,a time, an instance,inning (baseball), round, game,episode, chapter, instalment,Hui (people),Islam	4th failure	失敗４回目
ちゃう		aux-v, v5u	to do something completely	Escaped	ぬけちゃう！
はつ	発	ctr	departure, departing (from ...), departing (at time ...),sending, sent (by ...), sent (at ...),engine,counter for gunshots, bursts of gas, etc., counter for bullets, bombs, etc., counter for blows (punches)	Last Train from Midgar	ミッドガル発最終列車
さいしゅう	最終	n, adj-no	last, final, closing	Last Train from Midgar	ミッドガル発最終列車
きゃくしゃ	客車	n	passenger car	Inside Train	客車内
みる	見る	aux-v, v1	to see, to look, to watch, to view, to observe,to look over, to look on, to assess, to examine, to judge,to look after, to keep an eye on, to take care of,to view (e.g. flowers, movie),to try, to try out, to test,to see that..., to find that...	Look…you can see the surface now. This city don't have no day or night.	見ろよ…地上が見えてきたぜ。ひるも夜もねえ、オレたちの街がよ
ちじょう	地上	n, adj-no	above ground, surface,earth, world	Look…you can see the surface now. This city don't have no day or night.	見ろよ…地上が見えてきたぜ。ひるも夜もねえ、オレたちの街がよ
みえる	見える	v1, vi	to be seen, to be in sight,to look, to seem, to appear,to come	Look…you can see the surface now. This city don't have no day or night.	見ろよ…地上が見えてきたぜ。ひるも夜もねえ、オレたちの街がよ
ひるむ	怯む	v5m, vi	to falter, to flinch (from), to recoil (from), to quail (at)	Look…you can see the surface now. This city don't have no day or night.	見ろよ…地上が見えてきたぜ。ひるも夜もねえ、オレたちの街がよ
よる	夜	n-adv, n-t	evening, night	Look…you can see the surface now. This city don't have no day or night.	見ろよ…地上が見えてきたぜ。ひるも夜もねえ、オレたちの街がよ
プレート		n	plate (often as in "tectonic plate")	If that plate weren't there… we could see the sky.	ミッドガルのプレートさえなけりゃなぁ…。でっけえ空がおがめんのになあ
から	空	n, adj-no	emptiness, vacuum, blank	If that plate weren't there… we could see the sky.	ミッドガルのプレートさえなけりゃなぁ…。でっけえ空がおがめんのになあ
くうちゅう	空中	n	sky, air, mid-air	A floating city… Pretty unsettling scenery.	空中に浮かぶ都市か……。おちつかない風景だな
うかぶ	浮かぶ	v5b	to float, to be suspended,to rise to surface,to come to mind, to have inspiration	A floating city… Pretty unsettling scenery.	空中に浮かぶ都市か……。おちつかない風景だな
とし	都市	n, adj-no	town, city, municipal, urban	A floating city… Pretty unsettling scenery.	空中に浮かぶ都市か……。おちつかない風景だな
おちつく	落ち着く	v5k, vi	to calm down, to compose oneself, to regain presence of mind,to calm down, to settle down, to die down, to become stable, to abate,to settle down (in a location, job, etc.), to settle in,to be settled, to be fixed, to have been reached,to harmonize with, to harmonise with, to match, to suit, to fit,to be unobtrusive, to be quiet, to be subdued	A floating city… Pretty unsettling scenery.	空中に浮かぶ都市か……。おちつかない風景だな
ふうけい	風景	n, adj-no	scenery, scene, landscape, view, sight,scene (e.g. of a crime)	A floating city… Pretty unsettling scenery.	空中に浮かぶ都市か……。おちつかない風景だな
かんじる	感じる	v1	to feel, to sense, to experience	Huh? Never expect ta hear that outta someone like you.	はあ？あんたがそんなふうに感じるとはな
いがい	意外	adj-na, adv-to, n	unexpected, surprising	…You jus' full of surprises.	……意外だぜ
うえ	上	n-suf	above, up, over, elder (e.g. daughter),top, summit,surface, on,before, previous,superiority, one's superior (i.e. one's elder),on top of that, besides, what's more,upon (further inspection, etc.), based on (and occurring after),matters concerning..., as concerns ...,since (i.e. "for that reason"),suffix indicating higher social standing,place of one's superior (i.e. the throne),emperor, sovereign, shogun, daimyo,noblewoman (esp. the wife of a nobleman)	The upper world…a city on a plate…	上の世界……プレート都市……
せかい	世界	n	the world, society, the universe,sphere, circle, world,renowned, world-famous, well-known outside of Japan,realm governed by one Buddha, space	The upper world…a city on a plate…	上の世界……プレート都市……
くさる	腐る	v5r, vi	to rot, to go bad, to decay, to spoil, to fester, to decompose, to turn sour (e.g. milk),to corrode, to weather, to crumble,to become useless, to blunt, to weaken (from lack of practice),to become depraved, to be degenerate, to be morally bankrupt, to be corrupt,to be depressed, to be dispirited, to feel discouraged, to feel down,to have the audacity to, to be bastard enough to,to lose a bet,to be drenched, to become sopping wet	It's 'cuz of that &^#$# 'pizza' that people underneath are sufferin'!	あのくさったピザのせいで下の人間がどんなに苦しんでることか……
ピザ		n	pizza,fat, ugly person	It's 'cuz of that &^#$# 'pizza' that people underneath are sufferin'!	あのくさったピザのせいで下の人間がどんなに苦しんでることか……
した	下	n-pref	below, down, under, younger (e.g. daughter),bottom,beneath, underneath,just after, right after,inferiority, one's inferior (i.e. one's junior),trade-in,preliminary, preparatory	It's 'cuz of that &^#$# 'pizza' that people underneath are sufferin'!	あのくさったピザのせいで下の人間がどんなに苦しんでることか……
どんなに		adv	how, how much	It's 'cuz of that &^#$# 'pizza' that people underneath are sufferin'!	あのくさったピザのせいで下の人間がどんなに苦しんでることか……
くるしむ	苦しむ	v5m, vi	to suffer, to groan, to be worried	It's 'cuz of that &^#$# 'pizza' that people underneath are sufferin'!	あのくさったピザのせいで下の人間がどんなに苦しんでることか……
よごす	汚す	v5s, vt	to pollute, to contaminate, to soil, to make dirty, to stain,to disgrace, to dishonour, to dishonor, to defile	All the pollution from Mako energy above falls down on the world below.	上の世界で汚された魔晄エネルギーが下の世界に降りてくる
おりる	降りる	v1, vi	to descend (e.g. a mountain), to go down, to come down,to alight (e.g. from bus), to get off, to disembark, to dismount,to step down, to retire, to give up, to quit,to be granted, to be issued, to be given,to form (of frost, dew, mist, etc.),to be passed (from the body; e.g. of a roundworm)	All the pollution from Mako energy above falls down on the world below.	上の世界で汚された魔晄エネルギーが下の世界に降りてくる
くうき	空気	n	air, atmosphere,mood, situation,someone with no presence, someone who doesn't stand out at all	And the city below is full of polluted air.	下の世界は今じゃあ汚された空気のたまり場だ
たまりば	溜まり場	n	gathering spot, haunt, rendezvous, meeting place, hang-out	And the city below is full of polluted air.	下の世界は今じゃあ汚された空気のたまり場だ
おまけ	お負け	n, vs	freebie (e.g. with a purchase), something additional, bonus, an extra,price reduction, discount,exaggeration	On top'a that, the Reactor keeps drainin' up all the energy.	おまけに魔晄炉はどんどんエネルギーをくみ上げちまう
どんどん		adv, adv-to	drumming (noise), beating, pounding, banging, booming, stamping,rapidly, quickly, steadily,continuously, one after the other, in succession	On top'a that, the Reactor keeps drainin' up all the energy.	おまけに魔晄炉はどんどんエネルギーをくみ上げちまう
くみあげる	汲み上げる	v1, vt	to draw (water, etc.), to scoop up, to pump up, to dip up,to draw on (ideas) (from subordinates, the public, etc.), to take into account, to adopt	On top'a that, the Reactor keeps drainin' up all the energy.	おまけに魔晄炉はどんどんエネルギーをくみ上げちまう
おかげ	お蔭	n	grace (of God), benevolence (of Buddha), blessing,assistance, help, aid,effects, influence	Thanks to that, the land is dying. We can't clean the air anymore.	おかげで土地は枯れる一方だ。空気をきれいにする力もなくしちまった
とち	土地	n	plot of land, lot, soil,locality, region, place	Thanks to that, the land is dying. We can't clean the air anymore.	おかげで土地は枯れる一方だ。空気をきれいにする力もなくしちまった
かれる	枯れる	v1, vi	to wither (of a plant), to be blasted, to die,to mature (of one's personality, abilities, etc.)	Thanks to that, the land is dying. We can't clean the air anymore.	おかげで土地は枯れる一方だ。空気をきれいにする力もなくしちまった
いっぽう	一方	n-adv, n-suf	one (esp. of two), the other, one way, the other way, one direction, the other direction, one side, the other side, one party, the other party,on the one hand, on the other hand,whereas, although, but at the same time, meanwhile, in turn,just keeps, being inclined to ..., tending to be ..., tending to do ..., continuously ..., just keeps on ...ing, only	Thanks to that, the land is dying. We can't clean the air anymore.	おかげで土地は枯れる一方だ。空気をきれいにする力もなくしちまった
きれい	綺麗	adj-na	pretty, lovely, beautiful, fair,clean, clear, pure, tidy, neat,completely, entirely	Thanks to that, the land is dying. We can't clean the air anymore.	おかげで土地は枯れる一方だ。空気をきれいにする力もなくしちまった
ちから	力	n	force, strength, might, vigour (vigor), energy,capability, ability, proficiency, capacity, faculty,efficacy, effect,effort, endeavours (endeavors), exertions,power, authority, influence, good offices, agency,support, help, aid, assistance,stress, emphasis,means, resources	Thanks to that, the land is dying. We can't clean the air anymore.	おかげで土地は枯れる一方だ。空気をきれいにする力もなくしちまった
みんな	皆	adv, n	all, everyone, everybody,everything	Then why doesn't everyone move onto the Plate?	どうしてみんな上へ移らないんだろう……
うつる	移る	v5r, vi	to move (house), to transfer (department),to change the target of interest or concern,to elapse (passage of time),to be permeated by a colour or scent,to be infected, to be contagious, to spread (as in fire)	Then why doesn't everyone move onto the Plate?	どうしてみんな上へ移らないんだろう……
よごれる	汚れる	v1, vi	to get dirty, to become dirty,to become sullied, to become corrupted, to lose one's chastity	'Cuz they love their land, no matter how polluted it gets.	どんなに汚れていても地ベタが好きなのかもな
ち	地	n, n-suf	earth, ground, land, soil,place,territory,bottom (of a package, book, etc.),earth (one of the five elements)	'Cuz they love their land, no matter how polluted it gets.	どんなに汚れていても地ベタが好きなのかもな
ベタ		n	betta (esp. the Siamese fighting fish, Betta splendens)	'Cuz they love their land, no matter how polluted it gets.	どんなに汚れていても地ベタが好きなのかもな
スラム		n, vs	slam,slum,thrum	I know… no one lives in the slums because they want to.	わかってるさ…。好きでスラムに住んでるやつなどいない
すむ	住む	v5m, vi	to live (of humans), to reside, to inhabit, to dwell, to abide	I know… no one lives in the slums because they want to.	わかってるさ…。好きでスラムに住んでるやつなどいない
やつ	奴	pn	fellow, guy, chap,thing, object,he, she, him, her	I know… no one lives in the slums because they want to.	わかってるさ…。好きでスラムに住んでるやつなどいない
しく	敷く	v5k	to spread out, to lay out,to take a position,to impose widely (e.g. over a city)	It's like this train. It can't run anywhere except where its rails take it.	みんな、この列車とおなじ。敷かれたレールには逆らえないんだ
レール		n	rail (track),curtain rail,groundwork, spadework, preparations, arrangements	It's like this train. It can't run anywhere except where its rails take it.	みんな、この列車とおなじ。敷かれたレールには逆らえないんだ
こども	子供	n	child	Stop actin' like a damn kid. Siddown an' shu'up!	子供じゃねえんだ。じっとしてろよ
じっと	凝乎と	adv, vs	motionlessly (e.g. stand, wait), (be) still,fixedly (e.g. gaze, stare), intently (e.g. listen, think),patiently (endure), stoically,firmly (e.g. hold), restrained	Stop actin' like a damn kid. Siddown an' shu'up!	子供じゃねえんだ。じっとしてろよ
ろせん	路線	n	route (bus, train, air, etc.), line,line (taken by a group, organization, etc.), policy, course	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
ず	図	n, n-suf	drawing, picture, diagram, figure, illustration, chart, graph,sight, scene	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
ディスプレイ		n, vs	display	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
きっと	屹度	adv	surely, undoubtedly, almost certainly, most likely (e.g. 90 percent),sternly, severely,having no slack, rigid, stiff, tight,suddenly, abruptly, instantly	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
おもう	思う	v5u, vt	to think, to consider, to believe, to reckon,to think (of doing), to plan (to do),to judge, to assess, to regard,to imagine, to suppose, to dream,to expect, to look forward to,to feel, to be (in a state of mind), to desire, to want,to recall, to remember	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
せつめい	説明	n, vs, adj-no	explanation, exposition	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
あげる	上げる	aux-v, v1	to raise, to elevate,to do up (one's hair),to fly (a kite, etc.), to launch (fireworks, etc.), to surface (a submarine, etc.),to land (a boat),to deep-fry,to show someone (into a room),to summon (for geishas, etc.),to send someone (away),to enrol (one's child in school), to enroll,to increase (price, quality, status, etc.), to develop (talent, skill), to improve,to make (a loud sound), to raise (one's voice),to earn (something desirable),to praise,to give (an example, etc.), to cite,to summon up (all of one's energy, etc.),to arrest,to nominate,to give,to offer up (incense, a prayer, etc.) to the gods (or Buddha, etc.),to bear (a child),to conduct (a ceremony, esp. a wedding),(of the tide) to come in,to vomit,to do for (the sake of someone else),to complete ...,to humbly do ...	It's a map of the Midgar Rail System. Let's look at it together. I'll explain it to you.	ミッドガル列車路線図ディスプレイ。二人で見ればきっと楽しいと思うの。私、説明してあげるね
ルート		n	root,route	To the Route Map Screen	『ルートマップ画面へ』
マップ		n	map	To the Route Map Screen	『ルートマップ画面へ』
がめん	画面	n	terminal screen, scene, picture, the field (in TV), photo	To the Route Map Screen	『ルートマップ画面へ』
モニター		n, vs	(computer) monitor,consumer who comments on products, television programs, etc. (programmes),program or utility that monitors a program or activity	I like this kinda stuff. Bombs and monitors…you know, flashy stuff.	私、こういうの好きなのよ。爆弾とかモニタ画面とかハイテク関係
ハイテク		adj-na, n, adj-no	high-tech	I like this kinda stuff. Bombs and monitors…you know, flashy stuff.	私、こういうの好きなのよ。爆弾とかモニタ画面とかハイテク関係
かんけい	関係	n-suf	relation, relationship, connection,participation, involvement, concern,influence, effect,sexual relations, sexual relationship,related to, connected to	I like this kinda stuff. Bombs and monitors…you know, flashy stuff.	私、こういうの好きなのよ。爆弾とかモニタ画面とかハイテク関係
こんど	今度	n-adv, n-t	this time, now,next time, another time, shortly, soon,recently, previous, last	Next time, I'll make one just for you.	今度、私の手作り作品をプレゼントしちゃおうかな
てづくり	手作り	n, adj-no	handmade, homegrown, hand-crafted, homemade	Next time, I'll make one just for you.	今度、私の手作り作品をプレゼントしちゃおうかな
さくひん	作品	n	work (e.g. book, film, composition, etc.), opus, performance, production	Next time, I'll make one just for you.	今度、私の手作り作品をプレゼントしちゃおうかな
プレゼント		vs	present, gift,to give a present or gift	Next time, I'll make one just for you.	今度、私の手作り作品をプレゼントしちゃおうかな
えむ	笑む	v5m, vi	to smile	Thanks anyway	えんりょしとくよ
たのしみ	楽しみ	adj-na, n	enjoyment, pleasure, diversion, amusement, hobby,anticipation, looking forward to	Looking forward to it	楽しみにしてるよ
こうかい	後悔	n, vs, adj-no	regret, repentance, remorse	Oh yeah, you might regret it. I'm the type who takes things personal.	そう、きっと後悔するかもよ。私、ズガッ～ンと根にもつタイプなの
ね	根	n	root (of a plant),root (of a tooth, hair, etc.), center (of a pimple, etc.),root (of all evil, etc.), source, origin, cause, basis,one's true nature,(fishing) reef	Oh yeah, you might regret it. I'm the type who takes things personal.	そう、きっと後悔するかもよ。私、ズガッ～ンと根にもつタイプなの
もつ	持つ	v5t	to hold (in one's hand), to take, to carry,to possess, to have, to own,to maintain, to keep,to last, to be durable, to keep, to survive,to take charge of, to be in charge of	Oh yeah, you might regret it. I'm the type who takes things personal.	そう、きっと後悔するかもよ。私、ズガッ～ンと根にもつタイプなの
タイプ		n, vs	type, kind, sort, style,type (of person), (ideal) type, one's type,typewriter,typing	Oh yeah, you might regret it. I'm the type who takes things personal.	そう、きっと後悔するかもよ。私、ズガッ～ンと根にもつタイプなの
うで	腕	n	arm,skill, efforts, ability	Okay, then I'll put a little extra effort in and make it with a BANG.	うん、じゃ、腕によりをかけてドッカ～ンと制作するわ
かける	掛ける	suf, v1	to hang up (e.g. a picture on the wall), to let hang, to suspend (from), to hoist (e.g. sail), to raise (e.g. flag),to put on (e.g. a blanket), to put on top of, to cover,to put on (glasses, etc.), to wear (a necklace, etc.),to make (a call),to spend (time, money), to expend, to use,to pour (liquid) onto, to sprinkle (powder or spices) onto, to splash, to throw (e.g. water) onto somebody,to turn on (an engine, radio, etc.), to set (a dial, an alarm clock, etc.), to put on (a DVD, a song, etc.),to cause (somebody inconvenience, trouble, etc.), to burden (someone), to impose,to multiply (arithmetic operation),to secure (e.g. lock),to take a seat, to sit, to rest (something on something else), to support (something on something else),to bind,to wager, to bet, to risk, to stake, to gamble,to put an effect (spell, anaesthetic, etc.) on,to hold (a play, festival, etc.),to hold an emotion for (pity, hope, etc.),to argue (in court), to deliberate (in a meeting), to present (e.g. idea to a conference, etc.),to increase further,to catch (in a trap, etc.),to set atop,to erect (a makeshift building),to apply (insurance),to pun (on a word), to use (a word) as a pivot word, to play on words,to be partway doing ..., to begin (but not complete) ..., to be about to ...,to address (someone), to direct (something, to someone), to do (something, to someone)	Okay, then I'll put a little extra effort in and make it with a BANG.	うん、じゃ、腕によりをかけてドッカ～ンと制作するわ
せいさく	制作	n, vs	work (film, book),production, creation, turning (something) out, development	Okay, then I'll put a little extra effort in and make it with a BANG.	うん、じゃ、腕によりをかけてドッカ～ンと制作するわ
もうすぐ	もう直ぐ	exp, adv	soon, shortly, before long, nearly, almost	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
えき	駅	n	railway station, train station,staging post on a highway (in pre-modern Japan)	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
つく	着く	v5k, vi	to arrive at, to reach,to sit on, to sit at (e.g. the table)	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
いっぱい	一杯	n-suf, n-adv	amount necessary to fill a container (e.g. cupful, spoonful, etc.), drink (usu. alcoholic),full,one squid, octopus, crab, etc., one boat,fully, to capacity,a lot, much,all of ..., the entire ...	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
はなせる	話せる	v1, vi	to be able to speak, to be able to talk,to be understanding, to be sensible	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
もえる	燃える	v1, vi	to burn, to get fired up	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
せん	線	n, n-suf	line, stripe, stria,line (e.g. telephone line), wire,ray (e.g. X-ray), beam,line (e.g. of a railroad), track, route, lane,outline, contours, form,level,division,line (of action), position, approach, policy, principle,impression one leaves, air one gives off	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
ひ	火	n, n-suf	fire, flame, blaze	We're almost there. After talking with you, I'm ready to try! I think you've lit my fuse!	もうすぐ駅に着くね。CLOUDといっぱい話せて燃えたわ。私、導火線に火がついたかもよ
うわさ	噂	n, vs, adj-no	rumour, rumor, report, hearsay, gossip, common talk	Speak of the devil…	噂をすれば、ね
ひかり	光	n	light,illumination, ray, beam, gleam, glow,happiness, hope,influence, power,vision, eyesight	That light means that we're in the ID Security Check area.	この光がＩＤ検知エリア通過のサインなの
アイディー	ＩＤ	n	identification, ID, identity	That light means that we're in the ID Security Check area.	この光がＩＤ検知エリア通過のサインなの
けんち	検知	n, vs	detection	That light means that we're in the ID Security Check area.	この光がＩＤ検知エリア通過のサインなの
エリア		n	area	That light means that we're in the ID Security Check area.	この光がＩＤ検知エリア通過のサインなの
つうか	通過	n, vs	passing through (a tunnel, station, town, etc.), passing by (e.g. of a typhoon), transit,passage (of a bill, e.g. through parliament), carriage,passing (an examination, inspection, etc.), clearing	That light means that we're in the ID Security Check area.	この光がＩＤ検知エリア通過のサインなの
サイン		n	autograph, signature,sign,sine	That light means that we're in the ID Security Check area.	この光がＩＤ検知エリア通過のサインなの
ひそひそ		adv, adv-to	whisperingly	…whisper…whisper… (When the lights go off, you never know what kind of creeps'll come out.)	ひそひそ……（暗くなるからチカンが多いのよ。ＩＤ検知エリアは……）
さておく	さて置く	v5k, vt	to set aside	…We're almost back now. What a relief.	ま、それはさておき。もうすぐ地上に帰れるってわけ。なんだか、ホッとするね
ひじょう	非常	adj-na, adj-no	emergency,extraordinary, unusual	This train hasn't switched to security mode yet.	まだ列車の非常警備体制には移行してないみたいだな
たいせい	体制	n	order, system, structure, set-up, organization, organisation	This train hasn't switched to security mode yet.	まだ列車の非常警備体制には移行してないみたいだな
いこう	移行	n, vs	switching over to, migration, transition	This train hasn't switched to security mode yet.	まだ列車の非常警備体制には移行してないみたいだな
みたい		suf, adj-na	-like, sort of, similar to, resembling	This train hasn't switched to security mode yet.	まだ列車の非常警備体制には移行してないみたいだな
あした	明日	n-t	tomorrow,near future	I'm sure that will change by tomorrow.	明日はそうはいかないだろうけどな
ねむらせる	眠らせる	v1, vt	to put to sleep,to kill,to leave unused	…YAWN…that sure took its toll on me. I'm gonna sleep till we get to the station.	さすがにつかれたよ。駅に着くまで、眠らせてくれ
いばる	威張る	v5r, vi	to put on airs, to act big, to throw one's weight about, to be overbearing, to be domineering, to be bossy, to be pushy, to be proud, to be haughty, to be arrogant, to swagger, to boast, to brag	…snore…heebeebeeheebee…snore… (Don't act so damn big, BARRET…snooze…)	スースー……ムニャムニャ…。（BARRET、いばってんじゃねえぞ…）
な	名	n	name, given name,title,fame, renown, reputation,pretext, pretense, justification, appearance	Someday AVALANCHE's gonna be famous …and me, too!	アバランチで名をあげていつか俺だって……っす！
みらい	未来	n, adj-no	the future (usually distant),future tense,the world to come	Don't ya think I got a bright future ahead of me?	俺にも明るい未来がまってるっすよね？
まう	舞う	v5u, vi	to dance (orig. a whirling dance),to flutter about, to revolve	Don't ya think I got a bright future ahead of me?	俺にも明るい未来がまってるっすよね？
きたい	期待	n, vs	expectation, anticipation, hope	What do you have in mind?	なにを期待してる？
むり	無理	adj-no	unreasonable, unnatural, unjustifiable,impossible,forcible, forced, compulsory,excessive (work, etc.), immoderate,to work too hard, to try too hard,no way, not a chance, never, dream on,irrational	Don't hold your breath	無理だな
いま	居間	n	living room (Western style)	All my life, I felt like nothin' but a sidekick.	俺、いままでずっと人生ワキ役って感じで生きてきたっすよ
ずっと		adv	continuously in some state (for a long time, distance), throughout, all along, the whole time, all the way,much (better, etc.), by far, far and away,far away, long ago,direct, straight	All my life, I felt like nothin' but a sidekick.	俺、いままでずっと人生ワキ役って感じで生きてきたっすよ
じんせい	人生	n	(human) life (i.e. conception to death)	All my life, I felt like nothin' but a sidekick.	俺、いままでずっと人生ワキ役って感じで生きてきたっすよ
やく	役	n	use, service, role,post, position,scoring combination (e.g. in mahjong, card games, etc.), meld, hand	All my life, I felt like nothin' but a sidekick.	俺、いままでずっと人生ワキ役って感じで生きてきたっすよ
かんじ	感じ	n	feeling, sense, impression	All my life, I felt like nothin' but a sidekick.	俺、いままでずっと人生ワキ役って感じで生きてきたっすよ
いきる	生きる	v1, vi	to live, to exist,to make a living, to subsist,to be in effect, to be in use, to function,to come to life, to be enlivened,to be safe (in baseball, go, etc.)	All my life, I felt like nothin' but a sidekick.	俺、いままでずっと人生ワキ役って感じで生きてきたっすよ
せいめい	生命	n	life, existence	But, after joinin' AVALANCHE and tryin' to save the Planet, I feel like I can do lots of things.	でも、アバランチにはいって、星の生命を救えばこんな俺でも……いろいろとね
すくう	救う	v5u, vt	to rescue from, to help out of, to save	But, after joinin' AVALANCHE and tryin' to save the Planet, I feel like I can do lots of things.	でも、アバランチにはいって、星の生命を救えばこんな俺でも……いろいろとね
いろいろ	色々	n	various, all sorts of, variety of,various colors (colours)	But, after joinin' AVALANCHE and tryin' to save the Planet, I feel like I can do lots of things.	でも、アバランチにはいって、星の生命を救えばこんな俺でも……いろいろとね
やっぱ		adv	too, also, likewise, either,still, as before,even so, either way, nonetheless, in any event, all the same,as expected	Oh man, that's pretty harsh. CLOUD. You really think I won't?	ああ、ひどいなあ、CLOUDさん。やっぱダメっすかね、そうすかね
だめ	駄目	n	no good, not serving its purpose, useless, broken,hopeless, wasted, in vain, purposeless,cannot, must not, not allowed,neutral point (in go), intersection owned by neither player at the end of a game	Oh man, that's pretty harsh. CLOUD. You really think I won't?	ああ、ひどいなあ、CLOUDさん。やっぱダメっすかね、そうすかね
スカ		n	ska (type of Jamaican music)	Oh man, that's pretty harsh. CLOUD. You really think I won't?	ああ、ひどいなあ、CLOUDさん。やっぱダメっすかね、そうすかね
チカチカ		adv, adv-to, vs	flickering, flashing on and off, twinkling, glittering,glaringly (bright), painfully (bright),prickling (pain)	I'm seein' stars. This sucks. I hate the dark.	目がチカチカしたっす。俺、暗いのだめっす。苦手っす
にがて	苦手	adj-na, n	poor (at), weak (in), not very good (at),dislike (of), difficult to deal with	I'm seein' stars. This sucks. I hate the dark.	目がチカチカしたっす。俺、暗いのだめっす。苦手っす
むく	向く	v5k, vi	to turn toward, to look (up, down, etc.),to face (e.g. east), to look out on,to point to,to be suited to, to be fit for,to go in the direction of, to lean towards (of a feeling)	CLOUD! Look over here.	さ、CLOUD！こっちむいて
はじめる	始める	aux-v, v1	to start, to begin, to commence, to initiate, to originate,to open (e.g. a store), to start up, to establish (business. etc.),to start ..., to begin to ...	Okay, it's about to start.	さ、はじめるわよ
ぜんけい	全景	n	panoramic view, bird's-eye view	This is a complete model of the city of Midgar.	これが魔晄都市ミッドガルの全景フレームモデルね
フレーム		n	frame,flame (abusive or threatening message)	This is a complete model of the city of Midgar.	これが魔晄都市ミッドガルの全景フレームモデルね
モデル		n	model, dummy, mock-up,model (profession), fashion model,model (of a car, etc.), make, version,model, example, template, standard,model (in model theory), theory,person a fictional character was modeled on, inspiration	This is a complete model of the city of Midgar.	これが魔晄都市ミッドガルの全景フレームモデルね
スケール		n	scale, vernier	It's about a 1/10000 scale.	スケールはだいたい１／１００００ってとこかな
とこ	床	n	bed, bedding,sickbed,alcove,riverbed,seedbed,straw "core" of a tatami mat,floor	It's about a 1/10000 scale.	スケールはだいたい１／１００００ってとこかな
エム	Ｍ	n	M, m,masochist, masochistic,one thousand (Roman numeral),metre, meter,magnitude,mass,Mach,milli-, m,mega-, M,money	The top plate is about 50 meters above ground.	上のプレートは、地上から約５０Ｍ離れているの
はなれる	離れる	v1, vi	to be separated, to be apart, to be distant,to leave, to go away,to leave (a job, etc.), to quit, to give up,to lose connection with, to drift away from	The top plate is about 50 meters above ground.	上のプレートは、地上から約５０Ｍ離れているの
ささえる	支える	v1, vt	to support, to prop, to sustain, to underlay, to hold up, to defend,to hold at bay, to stem, to check	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
ちゅうしん	中心	suf	center, centre, middle, heart, core, focus, pivot, emphasis, balance,-centered, -centred, -focussed, -oriented, centered on, focussed on	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
しちゅう	支柱	n	prop, stay, support, brace, fulcrum	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
くかく	区画	n, vs	division, section, compartment, block, plot, lot, partition, boundary	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
たてる	建てる	v1, vt	to build, to construct	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
はしら	柱	suf, ctr	pillar, post,support, prop, mainstay,counter for buddhas, gods, nobles, etc.	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
きかい	機械	n	machine, mechanism,instrument, appliance, apparatus	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
とう	塔	n	tower, steeple, spire,stupa, pagoda, dagoba	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
よぶ	呼ぶ	v5b, vt	to call out (to), to call, to invoke,to summon (a doctor, etc.),to invite,to designate, to name, to brand,to garner (support, etc.), to gather,to take as one's wife	A main pillar supports the plate in the center, and there are other support pillars built in each section…	プレートを支えてるのは中心の大きな支柱と各区画に建てられた柱……。柱は、機械塔とも呼ばれてるわ
きた	北	n	north,the North, northern territories,North Korea,north wind	Psst…whisper…whisper… (The No. 1 Reactor we blew up was in the northern section.)	ヒソヒソ……（爆破した壱番魔晄炉が北のはずれにあるの）
はずれ	外れ	n	end, verge, extremity, tip, outskirts,miss, failure, blank (e.g. lottery ticket)	Psst…whisper…whisper… (The No. 1 Reactor we blew up was in the northern section.)	ヒソヒソ……（爆破した壱番魔晄炉が北のはずれにあるの）
じゅんばん	順番	n	turn (in line), order of things, sequential order	Then there's No. 2, No. 3 all the way up to the No. 8 Reactor. The 8 Reactors provide Midgar with electricity.	そこから順番に２、３……８番魔晄炉まで８つの魔晄炉がミッドガルの電力供給を支えているのよ
でんりょく	電力	n	electric power	Then there's No. 2, No. 3 all the way up to the No. 8 Reactor. The 8 Reactors provide Midgar with electricity.	そこから順番に２、３……８番魔晄炉まで８つの魔晄炉がミッドガルの電力供給を支えているのよ
きょうきゅう	供給	n, vs	supply, provision	Then there's No. 2, No. 3 all the way up to the No. 8 Reactor. The 8 Reactors provide Midgar with electricity.	そこから順番に２、３……８番魔晄炉まで８つの魔晄炉がミッドガルの電力供給を支えているのよ
それぞれ	夫れ夫れ	n-adv, adj-no	each, respectively	Each town used to have a name, but no one in Midgar remembers them.	それぞれの街には、名前もあったんだけどミッドガルに住む人は誰も覚えちゃいないわ
おぼえる	覚える	v1, vt	to memorize, to memorise, to commit to memory, to learn by heart, to bear in mind, to remember,to learn, to pick up, to acquire,to feel,to think, to regard	Each town used to have a name, but no one in Midgar remembers them.	それぞれの街には、名前もあったんだけどミッドガルに住む人は誰も覚えちゃいないわ
ばんごう	番号	n	number, series of digits	Instead of names, we refer to them by numbered sectors. That's how things turned out.	名前なんかより、番号で呼ぶの。そういうところなのよ、ここは
ふる	降る	v5r, vi	to fall (of rain, snow, ash, etc.), to come down,to form (of frost),to beam down (of sunlight or moonlight), to pour in,to visit (of luck, misfortune, etc.), to come, to arrive	Phew, look what's next! Look!	ふぅ…、次はこれ！ほら、見て
のる	乗る	v5r, vi	to get on (train, plane, bus, ship, etc.), to get in, to board, to take, to embark,to get on (e.g. a footstool), to step on, to jump on, to sit on, to mount,to reach, to go over, to pass,to follow, to stay (on track), to go with (the times, etc.),to take part, to participate, to join,to get into the swing (and sing, dance, etc.),to be deceived, to be taken in,to be carried, to be spread, to be scattered,to stick, to attach, to take, to go on	This is the route this train is on. The route spirals around the main pillar.	私たちがいま乗ってる列車のルートがこれよ
らせん	螺旋	n	spiral, helix,screw	We should be coming around the center, right now.	プレートを支えている大きな柱に螺旋状にレールが通っているの。いまは柱のちょうど真ん中あたりね
じょう	状	n, n-suf	shape, state,letter, correspondence	We should be coming around the center, right now.	プレートを支えている大きな柱に螺旋状にレールが通っているの。いまは柱のちょうど真ん中あたりね
かよう	通う	v5u, vi	to go to and from (a place), to go back and forth between, to run between (e.g. bus, train, etc.), to ply between,to go to (school, work, etc.), to attend, to commute, to frequent,to circulate (e.g. blood, electricity), to be communicated (e.g. thought),to resemble	We should be coming around the center, right now.	プレートを支えている大きな柱に螺旋状にレールが通っているの。いまは柱のちょうど真ん中あたりね
ちょうど	丁度	adv	exactly, precisely, just, right,as if, as though, quite	We should be coming around the center, right now.	プレートを支えている大きな柱に螺旋状にレールが通っているの。いまは柱のちょうど真ん中あたりね
まんなか	真ん中	n	middle, centre, center, mid-way	We should be coming around the center, right now.	プレートを支えている大きな柱に螺旋状にレールが通っているの。いまは柱のちょうど真ん中あたりね
あたり	当たり	suf	hit,success,guess, prediction,affability, friendliness,sensation, touch,bruise (on fruit),situation in which a stone or chain of stones may be captured on the next move (in the game of go),bite (of a fish on a hook), strike,per, each	We should be coming around the center, right now.	プレートを支えている大きな柱に螺旋状にレールが通っているの。いまは柱のちょうど真ん中あたりね
ポイント		n	point,points (of a railway), switch	Each checkpoint has an ID sensor device.	各通過ポイントにはＩＤ検知エリアが設置されてるの
せっち	設置	n, vs	establishment, institution,installation (of a machine or equipment)	Each checkpoint has an ID sensor device.	各通過ポイントにはＩＤ検知エリアが設置されてるの
じょうきゃく	乗客	n	passenger	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
すべて	全て	adv	everything, all, the whole,entirely, completely, wholly, all	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
みぶん	身分	n	social position, social status	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
ぜんぶ	全部	n-adv, n-t, adj-no	all, entire, whole, altogether	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
ビル		n	multi-floor building, multi-storey building,bill	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
ホスト		n	host (of a party, summit, etc.),host (of male host club)	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
コンピュータ		n	computer	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
れんどう	連動	adj-f	operating together, working together, gearing, linkage,linked, coupled, interlocking	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
チェック		n	check, plaid, checkered,checking, monitoring, looking over, scrutinizing, inspecting,check (banking), cheque, bill (restaurant),check (chess)	It checks the identities and backgrounds of each passenger on the train and is linked up to the central data bank at Shinra headquarters.	乗客すべての身分やなにから全部！神羅ビルのホストコンピュータと連動してチェックされちゃうわけよ
ふしん	不審	adj-na, n	incomplete understanding, doubt, question, distrust, suspicion, strangeness, infidelity	Whisper…whisper… (We definitely look suspicious, so we're using fake IDs.)	ひそひそ……（私たちはどう見たって不審人物だからニセのＩＤで通過してるの）
じんぶつ	人物	n	person, character, figure, personage, man, woman,one's character, one's personality,able person, talented person	Whisper…whisper… (We definitely look suspicious, so we're using fake IDs.)	ひそひそ……（私たちはどう見たって不審人物だからニセのＩＤで通過してるの）
にせ	偽	pref	imitation, fake, phony, counterfeit, forged, bogus, sham,pseudo-	Whisper…whisper… (We definitely look suspicious, so we're using fake IDs.)	ひそひそ……（私たちはどう見たって不審人物だからニセのＩＤで通過してるの）
あう	合う	aux-v, v5u	to come together, to merge, to unite, to meet,to fit, to match, to suit, to agree with, to be correct,to be profitable, to be equitable,to do ... to each other, to do ... together	Yo!! Get over here, all'ya!!	おう！！みんな、集まれ！！
あつまる	集まる	v5r, vi	to gather, to collect, to assemble	Yo!! Get over here, all'ya!!	おう！！みんな、集まれ！！
こんかい	今回	n-adv, n-t	now, this time, lately	This mission was a success. But don't get lazy now.	今回の作戦は成功だ。だがな、気を抜くなよ
ぬく	抜く	v5k	to pull out, to draw out, to extract, to unplug, to weed,to omit, to leave out, to go without, to skip,to do to the end, to carry through,to let out (e.g. air from a tyre), to drain (e.g. water from a bath), to empty,to pick out, to choose, to select, to extract,to pilfer, to steal,to remove, to get rid of, to take out,to pass, to overtake, to outstrip, to get ahead of,to pierce, to break through, to go through,to cut out (a shape), to create (a pattern) by dying the surrounding area,to seize, to capture, to reduce,to scoop (a story),to take out (an opponent's stones; in go),to masturbate (of a male), to ejaculate (while masturbating),to take (a photo), to record (video)	This mission was a success. But don't get lazy now.	今回の作戦は成功だ。だがな、気を抜くなよ
ほんばん	本番	n	performance, take, going before an audience or on-air,game, season, crucial moment,penetrative vaginal sex (with a prostitute), unsimulated sex (in an adult movie)	The hard part's still to come! Don't y'all be scared of that explosion!	本番はこれからだ！あんな爆発でびびるな！
ビビる		v5r, vi	to feel nervous, to feel afraid, to feel self-conscious, to lose one's nerve, to get cold feet, to get the jitters,to be startled, to be surprised, to be shocked, to feel frightened, to be spooked,to be shy, to be bashful	The hard part's still to come! Don't y'all be scared of that explosion!	本番はこれからだ！あんな爆発でびびるな！
もっと		adv	(some) more, even more, longer, further	Cause the next one's gonna be bigger than that!	次はもっと派手にかますぞ！
してやる	して遣る	v5r, vt	to do for (someone),to take in, to deceive, to hoodwink	Yo! What're ya doin' now?	おう！！なにしてやがる！
やすむ	休む	v5m, vi	to be absent, to take a day off,to rest, to have a break,to go to bed, to (lie down to) sleep, to turn in, to retire,to stop doing some ongoing activity for a time, to suspend business	Why don't all of us take a long vacation. Maybe we could go to a hot springs somewhere?	みんなでお休みとって温泉でもいかない？
おんせん	温泉	n	hot spring,onsen, hot spring resort, hot spring spa	Why don't all of us take a long vacation. Maybe we could go to a hot springs somewhere?	みんなでお休みとって温泉でもいかない？
たばね	束ね	n	bundle, control, management	Alrighty then! It's a date!	うん！CLOUD、約束ね　
ゆうわく	誘惑	n, vs	temptation, allurement, lure, enticement, seduction	I might just have to tempt you, then.	またそのときになったら誘惑する
あまり	余り	n-suf	remainder, remnant, rest, balance, surplus, remains (of a meal), leftovers,not very, not much,too much, excessively, overly,extreme, great, severe, tremendous, terrible,more than, over	CLOUD… Don't be so distant.	ね、CLOUD。あんまり冷たくしないで
なかよく	仲良く	vs	on good terms with, on cordial terms with, getting along well with, happily, peacefully,to make friends with, to be good friends with, to get along with	Everyone wants to be your friend. I'm sure…	みんな、CLOUDと仲良くなりたいんだよ。きっと…
ともだち	友達	n	friend, companion	Don't care 'bout bein' nobody's friend.	ともだちになることなんかねえんだ
つま	妻	n	wife,my dear, dear, honey,garnish (esp. one served with sashimi),embellishment	My husband never came back.	夫は帰ってこなかった。
み	身	n	body,oneself,one's place, one's position,main part, meat (as opposed to bone, skin, etc.), wood (as opposed to bark), blade (as opposed to its handle), container (as opposed to its lid)	I wonder if something happened to him?	夫の身になにかあったんだろうか？
きゅうか	休暇	n	holiday, day off, furlough, absence (from work)	No, I'm sure his leave was just canceled.	いや、休暇が取り消しになっただけかもしれない。
とりけし	取り消し	n	cancellation, withdrawal, abolition, revocation, cancel, CAN	No, I'm sure his leave was just canceled.	いや、休暇が取り消しになっただけかもしれない。
しれる	知れる	v1, vi	to become known, to come to light, to be discovered,to be known, to be understood,to obviously not amount to much, to seem trivial,to be evident, to be obvious, to go without saying,to be very intense (worry, hope, etc.), to be extremely severe	No, I'm sure his leave was just canceled.	いや、休暇が取り消しになっただけかもしれない。
せんそう	戦争	n, vs	war,fighting, fierce competition	You used to see that kind of thing a lot during the war.	戦争中はよくある風景だったね。
よく	良く	adv	nicely, properly, well, skillfully, skilfully,frequently, often	You used to see that kind of thing a lot during the war.	戦争中はよくある風景だったね。
あんぜん	安全	n, adj-na	safety, security	Please take AERIS somewhere safe.	AERISを安全なところへ。
いいのこす	言い残す	v5s, vt	to leave word with (a person), to state in one's will, to leave (something) unsaid, to forget to mention	That's the last thing she said before she died.	そう言い残して彼女は死んだ。
かのじょ	彼女	n	she, her,girlfriend	That's the last thing she said before she died.	そう言い残して彼女は死んだ。
いえ	家	n	house, residence, dwelling,family, household,lineage, family name	So I took AERIS home with me.	AERISを家に連れて帰ることにしたんだ。
つれる	連れる	v1, vt	to take (someone) with one, to bring along, to go with, to be accompanied by	So I took AERIS home with me.	AERISを家に連れて帰ることにしたんだ。
こんや	今夜	n-adv, n-t	this evening, tonight	I'm not letting you go tonight.	今夜は帰さないよ
かえす	帰す	v5s, vt	to send (someone) back, to send (someone) home	I'm not letting you go tonight.	今夜は帰さないよ
どこか	何処か	exp, n, adv	somewhere, anywhere, in some respects	Isn't there somewhere we could go to be alone?	ね、どっかで休んでいこう
もと	元	n	origin, source,base, basis, foundation, root,cause,ingredient, material,(somebody's) side, (somebody's) location,original cost (or capital, principal, etc.),(plant) root, (tree) trunk,first section of a waka,counter for blades of grass, tree trunks, etc., and for falcons (in falconry),handle (chopsticks, brush, etc.), grip	There's only the train graveyard around here. And they say there's ghosts around too!	でも、このあたり列車基場しかないし。オバケでるっていうし
ば	場	n	place, spot, space,field, discipline, sphere, realm,occasion, situation,scene (of a play, movie, etc.),session (of the stock market),area in which cards are laid out (in a card game),round (i.e. east, south, etc.),field,field (gestalt psychology)	There's only the train graveyard around here. And they say there's ghosts around too!	でも、このあたり列車基場しかないし。オバケでるっていうし
おばけ	お化け	n	goblin, monster, demon,ghost, apparition,something that's unusually large	There's only the train graveyard around here. And they say there's ghosts around too!	でも、このあたり列車基場しかないし。オバケでるっていうし
しまう	仕舞う	aux-v, v5u	to finish, to stop, to end, to put an end to, to bring to a close,to close (a business, etc.), to close down, to shut down, to shut up,to put away, to put back, to keep, to store,to finish ..., to do ... completely	…damn.	……しまった
おいで	お出で	exp	coming, going, being (somewhere),come, go, stay	Hey, come over here.	ね、もっとそばにおいでよ
へん	変	n-pref	strange, odd, peculiar, weird, curious, queer, eccentric, funny, suspicious, fishy,unexpected,change,incident, disturbance, disaster, accident,flat	But… There's a weirdo over there.	でも…そこの変な人
きみ	気味	n	sensation, feeling,tendency, propensity	Say, you're pretty gutsy.	きみ、ずいぶんどうどうとしてるね
どうどう		int	with a roaring sound (of water or wind), sound of feet stamping on the ground,whoa! (command used to stop or quieten down a horse, etc.)	Say, you're pretty gutsy.	きみ、ずいぶんどうどうとしてるね
のぞく	除く	v5k, vt	to remove, to eliminate, to eradicate,to exclude, to except	Why don't you go snoop somewhere else, Romeo?	のぞきはえんりょしてくれないかな？
はえる	映える	v1, vi	to shine, to glow,to look attractive, to look nice, to be set off (by)	Why don't you go snoop somewhere else, Romeo?	のぞきはえんりょしてくれないかな？
ぼく	僕	pn	I, me,you,manservant	I've had it!	僕、もうたえられない
たえる	耐える	v1, vi	to bear, to stand, to endure, to put up with,to support, to withstand, to resist, to brave,to be fit for, to be equal to	I've had it!	僕、もうたえられない
いけん	意見	n, vs, adj-no	opinion, view, comment	You know this is the first time we've ever agreed on something.	はじめてだね。意見があったの…
あいだ	間	conj	space (between), gap, interval, distance,time (between), pause, break,span (temporal or spatial), stretch, period (while),relationship (between, among),members (within, among),due to, because of	When you've been a train man as long as I have, you see a lot of people and a lot of lives.	長い間、駅員をしてますとね。いろんな人生の場面を目撃することになります
えきいん	駅員	n	station attendant	When you've been a train man as long as I have, you see a lot of people and a lot of lives.	長い間、駅員をしてますとね。いろんな人生の場面を目撃することになります
ばめん	場面	n, adj-no	scene, setting (e.g. of novel)	When you've been a train man as long as I have, you see a lot of people and a lot of lives.	長い間、駅員をしてますとね。いろんな人生の場面を目撃することになります
もくげき	目撃	n, vs	witnessing, observing, sighting	When you've been a train man as long as I have, you see a lot of people and a lot of lives.	長い間、駅員をしてますとね。いろんな人生の場面を目撃することになります
であう	出会う	v5u, vi	to meet (by chance), to come across, to run across, to encounter, to happen upon,to meet (e.g. of rivers, highways, etc.),to emerge and engage (an enemy)	People meeting, parting, joy, sadness… After a while, it doesn't even get to you anymore.	出会い、別れ、よろこび、悲しみ……少々のことじゃおどろきません
わかれる	別れる	v1, vi	to part (usu. of people), to part from, to part with, to be apart from,to separate (of a couple), to break up, to divorce,to lose (e.g. one's mother), to be bereaved	People meeting, parting, joy, sadness… After a while, it doesn't even get to you anymore.	出会い、別れ、よろこび、悲しみ……少々のことじゃおどろきません
よろこぶ	喜ぶ	v5b	to be delighted, to be glad, to be pleased,to congratulate,to gratefully accept	People meeting, parting, joy, sadness… After a while, it doesn't even get to you anymore.	出会い、別れ、よろこび、悲しみ……少々のことじゃおどろきません
かなしみ	悲しみ	n	sadness, sorrow, grief,affection, love	People meeting, parting, joy, sadness… After a while, it doesn't even get to you anymore.	出会い、別れ、よろこび、悲しみ……少々のことじゃおどろきません
おどろく	驚く	v5k, vi	to be surprised, to be astonished	People meeting, parting, joy, sadness… After a while, it doesn't even get to you anymore.	出会い、別れ、よろこび、悲しみ……少々のことじゃおどろきません
ころ	頃	n, n-adv, n-suf	(approximate) time, around, about, toward,suitable time (or condition),time of year, season	I wonder how long it's been… There's an invisible rail between me and the passengers.	いつごろからですかね…。お客さんと私の間にね見えないレールを敷いてしまうんですよ
たちいる	立ち入る	v5r, vi	to enter, to trespass,to interfere, to meddle, to pry into	I could never live their lives. I'm just a train man plain and simple. It's easier that way.	お客さんの人生には立ち入らないようにね。私なんぞは、ただの駅員。そういう生き方が楽なんですかね
いきかた	生き方	n	way of life, how to live	I could never live their lives. I'm just a train man plain and simple. It's easier that way.	お客さんの人生には立ち入らないようにね。私なんぞは、ただの駅員。そういう生き方が楽なんですかね
らく	楽	n	comfort, ease, relief, (at) peace, relaxation,easy, simple, without trouble, without hardships,(economically) comfortable,raku pottery	I could never live their lives. I'm just a train man plain and simple. It's easier that way.	お客さんの人生には立ち入らないようにね。私なんぞは、ただの駅員。そういう生き方が楽なんですかね
こころ	心	n	mind, heart, spirit,the meaning of a phrase (riddle, etc.)	That's not to say that the crossing gate of my heart doesn't hurt now and again.	それでもね、心のふみきりが痛むときはありましたよ
ふみきる	踏み切る	v5r, vt	to take off, to jump, to leap,to take the plunge, to decide, to embark on, to venture into, to launch out into,to step out of the ring	That's not to say that the crossing gate of my heart doesn't hurt now and again.	それでもね、心のふみきりが痛むときはありましたよ
いたむ	痛む	v5m, vi	to hurt, to ache, to feel a pain,to be injured, to be spoiled (e.g. food), to be damaged	That's not to say that the crossing gate of my heart doesn't hurt now and again.	それでもね、心のふみきりが痛むときはありましたよ
きかい	機会	n	chance, opportunity	But, that's a story for another day…	いや、その話はまたの機会に……
しはつ	始発	n	first departure (of the day: train, bus, etc.), first train, first bus,departing one's home station (of a train, bus, etc.)	First train leaves Midgar at 05:04am.	始発の出発時刻はミッドガル時０５時０４分になります
しゅっぱつ	出発	n, vs	departure	First train leaves Midgar at 05:04am.	始発の出発時刻はミッドガル時０５時０４分になります
じこく	時刻	n-adv, n-t	instant, time, moment	First train leaves Midgar at 05:04am.	始発の出発時刻はミッドガル時０５時０４分になります
いちや	一夜	n-adv, n-t	one night, all night, overnight, one evening	Morning. Dawn comes and things never change.	おはようございます。一夜明けても、あいかわらずですね
あける	開ける	v1, vi	to open (a door, etc.), to unwrap (e.g. parcel, package), to unlock,to open (for business, etc.),to empty, to remove, to make space, to make room,to move out, to clear out,to be away from (e.g. one's house), to leave (temporarily),to dawn, to grow light,to end (of a period, season),to begin (of the New Year),to leave (one's schedule) open, to make time (for),to make (a hole), to open up (a hole)	Morning. Dawn comes and things never change.	おはようございます。一夜明けても、あいかわらずですね
あいかわらず	相変わらず	adv, adj-no	as ever, as usual, the same, still	Morning. Dawn comes and things never change.	おはようございます。一夜明けても、あいかわらずですね
けが	怪我	n, vs	injury (to animate object), hurt	You be careful not to get hurt. Come on back again, hear?	けがしないよう、お気をつけて。いってらっしゃい
つける	漬ける	v1, vt	to soak, to seep, to dip in,to pickle	You be careful not to get hurt. Come on back again, hear?	けがしないよう、お気をつけて。いってらっしゃい
らっしゃる		v5aru, vi	to be, to come, to go	You be careful not to get hurt. Come on back again, hear?	けがしないよう、お気をつけて。いってらっしゃい
じょうしゃ	乗車	n, vs	boarding (a train, bus, etc.), getting into (e.g. a taxi)	ALL ABOARD! The train is about to depart.	さあ、おはやく御乗車ねがいます。もうすぐ出発しますよ
ねがう	願う	aux-v	to desire, to wish, to hope,to beg, to request, to implore, to pray,to have something done for oneself	ALL ABOARD! The train is about to depart.	さあ、おはやく御乗車ねがいます。もうすぐ出発しますよ
おちる	落ちる	v1, vi	to fall down, to drop, to fall (e.g. rain), to sink (e.g. sun or moon), to fall onto (e.g. light or one's gaze), to be used in a certain place (e.g. money),to be omitted, to be missing,to decrease, to sink,to fail (e.g. exam or class), to lose (contest, election, etc.),to crash, to degenerate, to degrade, to fall behind,to become indecent (of a conversation),to be ruined, to go under,to fade, to come out (e.g. a stain), to come off (e.g. makeup), to be removed (e.g. illness, possessing spirit, name on a list),to fall (into someone's hands), to become someone's possession,to fall (into a trap), to fall (for a trick),to give in, to give up, to confess, to flee,to fall, to be defeated, to surrender,to come to (in the end), to end in,to fall (in love, asleep, etc.),to swoon (judo),to consent, to understand,to crash, to freeze,to die,to move to the depths	I heard a rumor that the plate was going to fall, crushing this station, I've worked at so many years.	プレートが落ちるって噂を聞きましたです。長年親しんだこの駅ですからどうしてもはなれられません……
ながねん	長年	n-adv, n-t	long time, many years	I heard a rumor that the plate was going to fall, crushing this station, I've worked at so many years.	プレートが落ちるって噂を聞きましたです。長年親しんだこの駅ですからどうしてもはなれられません……
したしむ	親しむ	v5m, vi	to be intimate with, to befriend	I heard a rumor that the plate was going to fall, crushing this station, I've worked at so many years.	プレートが落ちるって噂を聞きましたです。長年親しんだこの駅ですからどうしてもはなれられません……
どうしても	如何しても	exp, adv	by all means, at any cost, no matter what, at any rate, surely,whether (one is) willing or not, willingly or unwillingly, willy-nilly,on no account, by no means,in the end, in the long run, after all, eventually	I heard a rumor that the plate was going to fall, crushing this station, I've worked at so many years.	プレートが落ちるって噂を聞きましたです。長年親しんだこの駅ですからどうしてもはなれられません……
うそ	嘘	int	lie, fib, falsehood, untruth,mistake, error,unwise move, bad decision,No way!, Unbelievable!, Really?!	But I just can't bear to leave here.	いったい、どうして……？うそであってほしいです
ひとつ	一つ	n-adv	one,for one thing,only,(not) even,just (e.g. "just try it")	Don't get all slaphappy just 'cause today's mission went well!!	作戦ひとつうまくいったぐらいでうかれてんじゃねえぞ！！
うかれる	浮かれる	v1, vi	to make merry, to be festive	Don't get all slaphappy just 'cause today's mission went well!!	作戦ひとつうまくいったぐらいでうかれてんじゃねえぞ！！
せんにゅう	先入	n	preconception, prejudice	All right!! You losers go on ahead!!	よし！！おめえら、先入ってろ！！
ロ	露	n	Russia	All right!! You losers go on ahead!!	よし！！おめえら、先入ってろ！！
あう	会う	v5u, vi	to meet, to encounter, to see,to have an accident, to have a bad experience	You wanna meet your little baby?	幼なじみにはやく会いてえか？
どく	退く	v5k, vi	to step aside, to move (i.e. out of the way), to make way,to resign, to retire, to quit, to secede	Out of my way!	そこ、どいてくれ
あやしむ	怪しむ	v5m, vt	to suspect	Can't have people suspectin' us.	街のやつらにあやしまれるとまずいからな…
とぼける	惚ける	v1, vi	to play dumb, to feign ignorance, to play innocent, to have a blank facial expression,to play the fool,to be in one's dotage	Hey! Don't act like you don't know what I mean!	ヘッ！！とぼけちゃってよ
ちょろちょろ		adv, adv-to, vs	trickling (of water),flickering (of fire),darting about (e.g. a small animal), scampering about, moving rapidly	You! CLOUD!! Get off your slow-movin' ass!!	よう！！　CLOUD！！チョロチョロすんじゃねぇ！！
はじまる	始まる	v5r, vi	to begin, to start, to commence,to happen (again), to begin (anew),to date (from), to originate (in)	The hell're you doin', boy? The operation's already started!!	なにやってんだ！！作戦は始まってんだぞ！！
ちょうだい	頂戴	exp	receiving, reception, getting, being given,eating, drinking, having,please, please do for me	I'm not opening up. Go away!!	開けないよ！！帰ってちょうだい
まったく	全く	int	really, truly, entirely, completely, wholly, perfectly,indeed,good grief (expression of exasperation)	Oh &$#&@!! What the hell's wrong tonight!!	まったくよぉ！！今夜はどうなってんだかよ！！
さっき	殺気	n	thirst for blood, bloodlust, determination to kill	I thought that long blackout was strange.	さっきまでずいぶん長く停電してたからみょうだと思ってたらよ
ていでん	停電	n, vs	power outage, electricity outage, blackout, failure of electricity supply	I thought that long blackout was strange.	さっきまでずいぶん長く停電してたからみょうだと思ってたらよ
みょう	妙	n, adj-na	strange, weird, odd, curious,wonder, mystery, miracle, excellence,cleverness, adroitness, knack, skill	I thought that long blackout was strange.	さっきまでずいぶん長く停電してたからみょうだと思ってたらよ
テロ		n	terror, terrorism	They say a Mako Reactor was destroyed above.	上で、魔晄炉爆破テロがおきたっていうじゃねぇか
おきる	起きる	v1, vi	to get up, to rise, to blaze up (fire),to wake up, to be awake, to stay awake,to occur (usu. of unfavourable incidents), to happen, to take place	They say a Mako Reactor was destroyed above.	上で、魔晄炉爆破テロがおきたっていうじゃねぇか
さけ	酒	n	alcohol, sake	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
かう	買う	v5u, vt	to buy, to purchase,to value, to have a high opinion,to stir, to provoke, to draw upon oneself	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
ニュース		n	news	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
とつぜん	突然	adj-no, adj-na, adv	abrupt, sudden, unexpected	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
みせ	店	n	store, shop, establishment, restaurant	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
おいだす	追い出す	v5s, vt	to expel, to drive out	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
たま	玉	n-suf	ball, sphere, globe, orb,bead (of sweat, dew, etc.), drop, droplet,ball (in sports),pile (of noodles, etc.),bullet,bulb (i.e. a light bulb),lens (of glasses, etc.),bead (of an abacus),ball (i.e. a testicle),gem, jewel (esp. spherical; sometimes used figuratively), pearl,female entertainer (e.g. a geisha),person (when commenting on their nature), character,item, funds or person used as part of a plot,egg,coin,precious, beautiful, excellent	I was jes sittin' here drinkin', watchin' the news by myself. n' all of a sudden I get kicked outta the &*%$ store. What's up with that!?	酒かっくらいながら、ニュースを見てりゃよ。突然、店を追い出される。たまんねぇよなぁ！！
よっぱらう	酔っ払う	v5u, vi	to get drunk	Woo…ah geez, I'm blitzed. I jes love them homemade cocktails. But they sure do creep up on ya.	ウウ……よっぱらっちゃった。手作りカクテル、おいしいんだもんなあ。きついんだもんなあ
カクテル		n, adj-no	cocktail	Woo…ah geez, I'm blitzed. I jes love them homemade cocktails. But they sure do creep up on ya.	ウウ……よっぱらっちゃった。手作りカクテル、おいしいんだもんなあ。きついんだもんなあ
もん	門	ctr	gate,branch of learning based on the teachings of a single master,division, phylum,counter for cannons	Woo…ah geez, I'm blitzed. I jes love them homemade cocktails. But they sure do creep up on ya.	ウウ……よっぱらっちゃった。手作りカクテル、おいしいんだもんなあ。きついんだもんなあ
そくほう	速報	n, vs	news flash, prompt report, bulletin, quick announcement	There's a news update. They say that there was a terrorist explosion up above, and that this time it was a Mako Reactor!!	ニュースの速報が入ったのよ。上で爆弾テロがあったっていうじゃない。それも、魔晄炉の爆発！！
たいへん	大変	n	very, greatly, terribly, awfully,immense, enormous, great,serious, grave, dreadful, terrible,difficult, hard,major incident, disaster	You know what this means?	これがどんなに大変なことかわかる？
じじょう	事情	n	circumstances, conditions, situation, reasons, state of affairs	Ya see, I keep on top of these things, an' if ya ask me…	事情通の私にいわせればね
つう	通	ctr	connoisseur, authority,counter for letters, notes, documents, etc.	Ya see, I keep on top of these things, an' if ya ask me…	事情通の私にいわせればね
まひ	麻痺	n, vs	paralysis, palsy, numbness, stupor	if you knock out Midgar's power, then all of its computers and signals are going to be knocked out, too.	ミッドガルの電力がマヒしちゃったらコンピューターとか信号とかいろいろ止まっちゃうじゃない
しんごう	信号	n	signal, signalling, signaling,traffic light, traffic signal	if you knock out Midgar's power, then all of its computers and signals are going to be knocked out, too.	ミッドガルの電力がマヒしちゃったらコンピューターとか信号とかいろいろ止まっちゃうじゃない
とまる	止まる	v5r, vi	to stop (moving), to come to a stop,to stop (doing, working, being supplied), to come to a halt, to cease, to be stopped, to be suspended,to alight, to perch on	if you knock out Midgar's power, then all of its computers and signals are going to be knocked out, too.	ミッドガルの電力がマヒしちゃったらコンピューターとか信号とかいろいろ止まっちゃうじゃない
たて	縦	n	the vertical, height,front-to-back, length,north-to-south,vertical (relationship), hierarchy,(weaving) warp	Financially there must've been about a billion gil worth of damage.	経ざい的損失は、ん～～１０億ギルはくだらないし
そんしつ	損失	n	loss (of assets, profit, etc.)	Financially there must've been about a billion gil worth of damage.	経ざい的損失は、ん～～１０億ギルはくだらないし
たくさん	沢山	n-suf	a lot, lots, plenty, many, a large number, much, a great deal, a good deal,enough, sufficient,enough, too many, too much	An' that ain't all!! A lotta innocent people got killed, too!	それに！！たくさんの罪なき人々が死んだと思うのよ
つみ	罪	n, adj-na	crime, sin, wrongdoing, indiscretion,penalty, sentence, punishment,fault, responsibility, culpability,thoughtlessness, lack of consideration	An' that ain't all!! A lotta innocent people got killed, too!	それに！！たくさんの罪なき人々が死んだと思うのよ
ひとびと	人々	n, adj-no	each person, people, men and women, everybody	An' that ain't all!! A lotta innocent people got killed, too!	それに！！たくさんの罪なき人々が死んだと思うのよ
まよなか	真夜中	n-adv, n-t	dead of night, midnight	If the explosion had been in the middle of the night, that woulda been one thing. At least the people coulda gone in their sleep.	爆破が真夜中だったから、まだいいわ。眠ってた人はそのまま目が覚めないだけね
ねむる	眠る	v5r, vi	to sleep (not necessarily lying down),to die,to lie idle (e.g. of resources), to be dormant, to be unused,to close one's eyes	If the explosion had been in the middle of the night, that woulda been one thing. At least the people coulda gone in their sleep.	爆破が真夜中だったから、まだいいわ。眠ってた人はそのまま目が覚めないだけね
そのまま	其の儘	adv	without change, as it is, as it was,just like, extremely similar,immediately, just after, without a pause	If the explosion had been in the middle of the night, that woulda been one thing. At least the people coulda gone in their sleep.	爆破が真夜中だったから、まだいいわ。眠ってた人はそのまま目が覚めないだけね
さめる	覚める	v1, vi	to wake, to wake up,to become sober, to sober up, to regain consciousness (e.g. after anaesthesia),to come to one's senses, to be disillusioned	If the explosion had been in the middle of the night, that woulda been one thing. At least the people coulda gone in their sleep.	爆破が真夜中だったから、まだいいわ。眠ってた人はそのまま目が覚めないだけね
とにかく	兎に角	adv	anyhow, at any rate, anyway, somehow or other, generally speaking, in any case, at least	This Mako explosion has really sent Midgar into a fit.	とにかく、魔晄炉の爆発でミッドガルは大混乱らしいの
こんらん	混乱	n, vs	disorder, chaos, confusion, mayhem	This Mako explosion has really sent Midgar into a fit.	とにかく、魔晄炉の爆発でミッドガルは大混乱らしいの
そ	祖	n	ancestor, forefather, progenitor	Oh, well excuse ME!	あ、そ！
かつ	勝つ	v5t, vi	to win, to gain victory	Explosions! Explosions! Oh Man! AVALANCHE is so cool!	爆発！！　爆発！！スゲッー！アバランチ、かっくいー！
ちち	父	n	father	Hey!! Heh heh heh… Say, you're kinda cute. Cutie pie…	あっ！！ウヘヘヘヘ……やっぱ、かわいいなぁ。マイラブリーエンジェルちゃん…
のむ	飲む	v5m, vt	to drink, to gulp, to swallow, to take (medicine),to smoke (tobacco),to engulf, to overwhelm,to keep down, to suppress,to accept (e.g. demand, condition),to make light of, to conceal	I wasn't even done with my drink. I didn't even pay my bill…	酒、飲みかけだったのによ。あっ、かんじょうもまだだ…
かんじょう	感情	n, adj-no	emotion, feeling, feelings, sentiment	I wasn't even done with my drink. I didn't even pay my bill…	酒、飲みかけだったのによ。あっ、かんじょうもまだだ…
いじょう	異常	n, adj-na	strangeness, abnormality, disorder	All's quiet!! Shh, I'm spying now!	異常なし！！ただいま、スパイ中！
スパイ		n, vs	spy	All's quiet!! Shh, I'm spying now!	異常なし！！ただいま、スパイ中！
ほうこく	報告	n, vs	report, information	OH!! There's something!! DANGER!!  ALERT!!	ああ！！なんか、でてきました！！報告～！！　報告～！！
あなた	貴方	pn	you (referring to someone of equal or lower status),dear (what a wife calls a husband)	Did you hear?	あなた、知ってる？
さかば	酒場	n	bar, pub, tavern	About that little girl named TIFA and that bar called '7th Heaven'.	あのTIFAちゃんのお店のことよ。『セブンスヘブン』って酒場
おせっかい	お節介	n	meddling, meddlesomeness, nosiness, interference, officiousness,meddler, buttinsky, busybody	I'm not only informed, I'm kinda nosey too. Anyhow, I got the scoop.	私は事情通のうえに、おせっかいだからいろいろ知ってるのよね
めいぶつ	名物	n	famous product, special product, speciality, specialty	That BARRET and three of his henchmen are like this sometimes.	あの酒場の名物BARRETと手下の３人。ときどき、こうなのよ
てした	手下	n	subordinate, underling, henchman, minion	That BARRET and three of his henchmen are like this sometimes.	あの酒場の名物BARRETと手下の３人。ときどき、こうなのよ
ときどき	時々	adv, n, adj-no	sometimes, at times	That BARRET and three of his henchmen are like this sometimes.	あの酒場の名物BARRETと手下の３人。ときどき、こうなのよ
こう	斯う	int	in this way, thus, such,uh...	That BARRET and three of his henchmen are like this sometimes.	あの酒場の名物BARRETと手下の３人。ときどき、こうなのよ
ごちゃごちゃ		adv	messy, confused, chaotic, disorderly, mixed-up, jumbled up,complaining about various things	Suddenly, they throw out a customer and start talking trash to him. It's strange, if you ask me. And that place always smells like gun powder.	突然、お客を追い出してゴチャゴチャやってるの。なんか、あやしいのよ。火薬のにおいとかするのよね
かやく	火薬	n	gunpowder, powder	Suddenly, they throw out a customer and start talking trash to him. It's strange, if you ask me. And that place always smells like gun powder.	突然、お客を追い出してゴチャゴチャやってるの。なんか、あやしいのよ。火薬のにおいとかするのよね
におい	匂い	n	odour, odor, scent, smell, stench,aura, whiff, smacks of ..., sense, flavour, flavor	Suddenly, they throw out a customer and start talking trash to him. It's strange, if you ask me. And that place always smells like gun powder.	突然、お客を追い出してゴチャゴチャやってるの。なんか、あやしいのよ。火薬のにおいとかするのよね
いける	生ける	adj-f	to arrange (flowers), to plant,living, live	It's dangerous, I tell you. They must be doing terrible things in there.	危ないわ。きっと、いけないことをしてるにちがいないわ
ちがい	違い	n	difference, distinction, discrepancy,mistake, error	It's dangerous, I tell you. They must be doing terrible things in there.	危ないわ。きっと、いけないことをしてるにちがいないわ
クール		n	cool (temperature, color, etc.),cool (i.e. calm and collected),cool (i.e. fashionable, attractive, etc.),course (of medical treatment),season (series) of a television program (usu. 13 installments over a 3-month period)	Oh really? Well, aren't you a cool one!	あ、そ！あなたってクールなのね
テレビ		n	television, TV,TV program, TV programme, TV broadcast	There's a TV in there, but my cheap aunt won't let me in the house. Look for yourself.	この家にはテレビがあんだけどよ。ケチなおばさんがいれてくんねぇのさ。まあ、見てろって
ケチ		n, adj-na	stinginess, miserliness, penny-pinching, cheeseparing, miser, pinchpenny, skinflint, cheapskate, tightwad, niggard,shabby, cheap, mangy, poor,petty, narrow-minded, quibbling, mean-spirited,bad luck, ill omen, glitch	There's a TV in there, but my cheap aunt won't let me in the house. Look for yourself.	この家にはテレビがあんだけどよ。ケチなおばさんがいれてくんねぇのさ。まあ、見てろって
おばさん	伯母さん	n	aunt	There's a TV in there, but my cheap aunt won't let me in the house. Look for yourself.	この家にはテレビがあんだけどよ。ケチなおばさんがいれてくんねぇのさ。まあ、見てろって
がいとう	街頭	n	(on the) street	Now that you mention it, there used to be an outside TV monitor here in the slums.	そういえばよ。この７番街スラムにも街頭テレビがあったんだけどよ
そいつ	其奴	pn	he, she, that person, that guy, that fellow,that, that one, that thing	But that BARRET, busted it up.	そいつをぶっこわしたのがあのBARRETさ
れい	例	n, n-pref, adj-no	custom, practice, habit, usual,said, aforementioned,instance, example, case, illustration, usage,precedent	Shot it up with that weird machine gun hand of his. Blam, blam, blam.	ガンガンガンガンガンガン！！って、例の腕ガンでいきなりだぜ！
がん	癌	n	cancer	Shot it up with that weird machine gun hand of his. Blam, blam, blam.	ガンガンガンガンガンガン！！って、例の腕ガンでいきなりだぜ！
いきなり	行き成り	adv, adj-no	abruptly, suddenly, all of a sudden, without warning	Shot it up with that weird machine gun hand of his. Blam, blam, blam.	ガンガンガンガンガンガン！！って、例の腕ガンでいきなりだぜ！
たしか	確か	adv	sure, certain, positive, definite,reliable, trustworthy, safe, sound, firm, accurate, correct, exact,If I'm not mistaken, If I remember correctly, If I remember rightly	I think it was when President Shinra was on.	あんときは、たしかプレジデント神羅が出演してたな
プレジデント		n	president	I think it was when President Shinra was on.	あんときは、たしかプレジデント神羅が出演してたな
しゅつえん	出演	n, vs	performance, appearance (in a stage, film, TV show, etc.)	I think it was when President Shinra was on.	あんときは、たしかプレジデント神羅が出演してたな
きょう	今日	n-t	today, this day,these days, recently, nowadays	He was on again this morning, too, you know.	今日のニュースでもプレジデント神羅が出るだろうからよ
もむ	揉む	v5m, vt	to rub, to crumple,to massage,to argue, to have a heated discussion,to train, to coach,to jostle, to crowd, to shake, to rock,to have various experiences (out in the world)	I thought you were something a little better than this, but you're just a punk kid after all.	おまえ、ただもんじゃねぇと思ったが幼なじみだったのかよ…
ちゃんと		adv, vs	diligently, seriously, earnestly, reliably, steadily, legitimately,perfectly, properly, exactly, orderly, punctually, regularly,sufficiently, satisfactorily,quickly	Just what the hell do you think you're doing with my little TIFA?	俺のTIFAちゃんと……そんで、お前は俺のTIFAちゃんのいったいなんなんだよ
なんで	何で	adv	why?, what for?,how?, by what means?	Why does she ask you n' not me?	なんで、俺じゃなくてお前にたのむんだよ
ほしぞら	星空	n	starry sky	Not those memories beneath the stars when we were kids or all the stuff we talked about.	星空の下の思い出も子供のころの夢の話もな
おもいで	思い出	n	memories, recollections, reminiscence	Not those memories beneath the stars when we were kids or all the stuff we talked about.	星空の下の思い出も子供のころの夢の話もな
ゆめ	夢	n	dream	Not those memories beneath the stars when we were kids or all the stuff we talked about.	星空の下の思い出も子供のころの夢の話もな
せいぜい	精々	adv	at the most, at best, to the utmost, as much (far) as possible	About all I got is the sake that she poured me everyday I went to the bar.	せいぜいあるのは、毎日お店に通ってお酒ついでもらったことぐらいさ
ついで	序	n	opportunity, occasion	About all I got is the sake that she poured me everyday I went to the bar.	せいぜいあるのは、毎日お店に通ってお酒ついでもらったことぐらいさ
たつ	立つ	v5t, vi	to stand, to rise, to stand up,to find oneself (e.g. in a difficult position),to depart (on a plane, train, etc.)	Hey! You! Don't think you can just walk outta here like that!	おい！　幼なじみ！このまま立ちさるなんてゆるさねえ！
ゆるす	許す	v5s, vt	to permit, to allow, to approve, to consent to,to forgive, to pardon, to excuse, to tolerate,to exempt (someone) from, to remit, to release, to let off,to acknowledge, to admit,to trust, to confide in, to let one's guard down,to give up (points in a game, distance in a race, etc.), to yield	Hey! You! Don't think you can just walk outta here like that!	おい！　幼なじみ！このまま立ちさるなんてゆるさねえ！
かわす	交わす	suf, v5s	to exchange (messages, greetings, arguments, etc.),to intersect, to cross, to interlace,... with one another, ... to each other	Shhi-! You busted a promise!! n' you made TIFA cry!!	クッ～！！　約束かわしたんだろ！！TIFAちゃんを泣かせんなよ！
なかせる	泣かせる	v1, vt	to make someone cry, to move someone to tears,to let cry,to grieve	Shhi-! You busted a promise!! n' you made TIFA cry!!	クッ～！！　約束かわしたんだろ！！TIFAちゃんを泣かせんなよ！
てんし	天使	n, adj-no	angel	Urgh! You made a promise, didn't ya!? n' don' you fergit that TIFA like an angel. An angel of this slum!	んがっ～！　約束したんだろ！！TIFAちゃんはスラムの街の天使だってこと忘れんなよ！-
わすれる	忘れる	v1, vt	to forget, to leave carelessly, to be forgetful of, to forget about, to forget (an article)	Urgh! You made a promise, didn't ya!? n' don' you fergit that TIFA like an angel. An angel of this slum!	んがっ～！　約束したんだろ！！TIFAちゃんはスラムの街の天使だってこと忘れんなよ！-
みがく	磨く	v5k, vt	to polish, to shine, to brush (e.g. teeth), to grind (e.g. lens),to refine (e.g. a skill), to improve, to cultivate	I'm leaving. Goin' faraway. But when I come back I'll be a better man! This is goodbye!	俺、男をみがく旅に出っからよ！これで、さよならだぜ！
たび	旅	n, vs	travel, trip, journey	I'm leaving. Goin' faraway. But when I come back I'll be a better man! This is goodbye!	俺、男をみがく旅に出っからよ！これで、さよならだぜ！
さよなら		adj-f	goodbye, so long, farewell,saying goodbye to (e.g. life as a bachelor), putting an end to, parting with,farewell (performance, party, etc.), final, last, game-winning (e.g. hit)	I'm leaving. Goin' faraway. But when I come back I'll be a better man! This is goodbye!	俺、男をみがく旅に出っからよ！これで、さよならだぜ！
やく	焼く	v5k, vt	to burn,to roast, to broil, to grill, to bake, to toast, to barbecue,to heat, to heat up,to make (charcoal, pottery, bricks, etc.), to bake, to fire, to burn,to tan (i.e. suntan), to burn,to print (a photo), to burn (an optical disc),to be jealous of, to be envious of, to envy	Hey! Childhood friend! You better take good care of TIFA!	やい！　幼なじみ！！TIFAちゃんを大切にな！
たいせつ	大切	adj-na, n	important, necessary, indispensable,beloved, precious, dear, cherished, valuable,careful	Hey! Childhood friend! You better take good care of TIFA!	やい！　幼なじみ！！TIFAちゃんを大切にな！
もどる	戻る	v5r, vi	to turn back (e.g. half-way),to return, to go back,to recover (e.g. something lost), to be returned,to rebound, to spring back	Cause, I'll be back!! Don't make her cry, dammit!!	ぜ～ったい、もどってやれよ！！いいな、泣かせんなよ！！
おんな	女	n	female, woman, female sex,female lover, girlfriend, mistress, (someone's) woman	I hope he doesn't get hurt.	ジョニー、悪い女にだまされたりしなけりゃいいけど
きがかり	気がかり	n, adj-na	worry, anxiety, concern	That worries me the most.	それだけが、気がかりだなあ
きゅう	急	n	sudden, abrupt, unexpected,urgent, pressing,steep, sharp, precipitous,rapid, swift, fast,emergency, crisis, danger,urgency, hurrying, haste,(in gagaku or noh) end of a song	Ah…Johnny's gone. You look a little disappointed.	はぁ……　ジョニーのやつ、行っちまった。なんだか急にはりあいなくなっちゃったよ
はりあう	張り合う	v5u, vi	to compete (with each other), to contend for, to vie for, to rival	Ah…Johnny's gone. You look a little disappointed.	はぁ……　ジョニーのやつ、行っちまった。なんだか急にはりあいなくなっちゃったよ
なくなる	亡くなる	v5r, vi	to die	Ah…Johnny's gone. You look a little disappointed.	はぁ……　ジョニーのやつ、行っちまった。なんだか急にはりあいなくなっちゃったよ
じぶん	自分	pn	myself, yourself, oneself, himself, herself,I, me,you	I don't like to say it myself but, I'm just a lonely guy when I'm not drinking.	俺って自分で言うのもなんだけど酒飲んでないと、さびしがりやさんなわけよ
きのう	昨日	n-adv, n-t	yesterday	Yesterday, everyone in town was peeking at the two of you from outside the bar.	きのう、お店の外からあなたたちのこと街のみんなでのぞき見してたのよ
そと	外	n	outside, exterior,open air,other place	Yesterday, everyone in town was peeking at the two of you from outside the bar.	きのう、お店の外からあなたたちのこと街のみんなでのぞき見してたのよ
くいる	悔いる	v1, vt	to regret	TIFA's childhood friend. That's a good one!	TIFAちゃんの幼なじみだなんてにくいにくい！
じょうほう	情報	n	information, news, intelligence, advices,information, [object Object]	Listen! If there isn't anyone to listen, what's the use of getting gossip on everyone!?	もう！！！話を聞いてくれる人がいないと情報を集めてもしかたないのよね！
あつめる	集める	v1, vt	to collect, to assemble, to gather	Listen! If there isn't anyone to listen, what's the use of getting gossip on everyone!?	もう！！！話を聞いてくれる人がいないと情報を集めてもしかたないのよね！
しかた	仕方	n	way, method, means, resource, course	Listen! If there isn't anyone to listen, what's the use of getting gossip on everyone!?	もう！！！話を聞いてくれる人がいないと情報を集めてもしかたないのよね！
わく	沸く	v5k, vi	to grow hot (e.g. water), to boil,to get excited (at), to erupt (in applause, cheering, etc.), to be in a ferment, to take place energetically,to ferment,to melt (of metal)	I'll get a little more information that would pique even your interest. You wait and see!	今度はきっと、あなたでも興味のわくすご～い情報を集めておくから楽しみにしておいて
マリーン		n	marine,Marine, the Marines	H, hey!! Keep your mitts off of Marlene!!	おっおい！マリンちゃんには手を出すなよ！！
だす	出す	suf, v5s	to take out, to get out,to put out, to reveal, to show,to submit (e.g. thesis), to turn in,to publish, to make public,to send (e.g. letter),to produce (a sound), to start (fire),to serve (food),to begin ..., to start to ..., to burst into ...	H, hey!! Keep your mitts off of Marlene!!	おっおい！マリンちゃんには手を出すなよ！！
いじめる	苛める	v1, vt	to ill-treat, to bully, to torment, to pick on, to tease, to be cruel to, to persecute,to be tough on (e.g. one's body), to treat harshly	Ahh! Now I ain't got no one to pick on!	あ～あ！いじめる相手がいなくなっちゃうよ！
いざ		adv, int	now, come (now), well	When it comes down to it…I'm gutless. I'm still just a no-good kid.	ああ～、いざとなると勇気がでない。だめだな、ボクって。まだ子供だな～
ゆうき	勇気	n	courage, bravery, valour, valor, nerve, boldness	When it comes down to it…I'm gutless. I'm still just a no-good kid.	ああ～、いざとなると勇気がでない。だめだな、ボクって。まだ子供だな～
ほんじつ	本日	n-adv, n-t	today	We're closed today. Come back tomorrow.	本日は閉店いたしました。またのご来店をおまちしております
へいてん	閉店	n, vs	closing up shop (for the day),stopping business, going out of business	We're closed today. Come back tomorrow.	本日は閉店いたしました。またのご来店をおまちしております
いたす	致す	v5s, vt	to do	We're closed today. Come back tomorrow.	本日は閉店いたしました。またのご来店をおまちしております
らいてん	来店	n, vs	coming to a store (restaurant, bar, shop, etc.)	We're closed today. Come back tomorrow.	本日は閉店いたしました。またのご来店をおまちしております
じ	字	n	character (i.e. kanji),hand-writing, penmanship,the ... word (i.e. "the L word" = "love")	What crappy handwriting. And look at all this graffiti!	きたない字だな。おまけに、いたずら書きだらけだ
いたずらがき	いたずら書き	n	scribbling, doodling, graffiti	What crappy handwriting. And look at all this graffiti!	きたない字だな。おまけに、いたずら書きだらけだ
だらけ		n-suf	full of (e.g. mistakes), riddled with,covered all over with (blood, mud, etc.)	What crappy handwriting. And look at all this graffiti!	きたない字だな。おまけに、いたずら書きだらけだ
とう	疾う	n, adj-no	quickly, swiftly,a long time ago	Papa!!	とうちゃん！！
けんか	喧嘩	n, vs	quarrel, brawl, fight, squabble, scuffle, argument	Did you fight with BARRET?	BARRETとはケンカしなかった？
がまん	我慢	n, vs	patience, endurance, perseverance, tolerance, self-control, self-denial	Not this time	ガマンした
やっぱり	矢っ張り	adv	too, also, likewise, either,still, as before,even so, either way, after all, nonetheless, in any event, all the same,as expected	I should have known.	やっぱり？
たす	足す	v5s, vt	to add (numbers),to add (something), to top up (with something),to take care of (e.g. one's business)	He's always pushing people around, and you've always been in fights ever since you were little.	BARRETはあんな人だしCLOUDは子供のころからケンカばかりしてたしね
おとな	大人	n, adj-no	adult	Hmm. You've grown up. When you were little you used to get into fights at the drop of a hat.	ふ～ん。CLOUDもおとなになったのね。子供のころは、すぐケンカだったのに
すぐ	直ぐ	adj-na	immediately, at once, right away, directly,soon, before long, shortly,easily, readily, without difficulty,right (near), nearby, just (handy),honest, upright, frank, straightforward	Hmm. You've grown up. When you were little you used to get into fights at the drop of a hat.	ふ～ん。CLOUDもおとなになったのね。子供のころは、すぐケンカだったのに
にゅうりょく	入力	n, vs	input, (data) entry	Enter name	『TIFA名前入力』
めったに	滅多に	adv	rarely, seldom	You almost never see them here in the slums.	スラムじゃ、めったにさかないのよ
さく	裂く	v5k, vt	to tear, to rip up,to cut up, to cleave, to cut open (esp. the abdomen),to forcibly separate (e.g. two lovers),to spare (time, money, etc.), to use part of something,to have a tattoo in the corner of one's eye	You almost never see them here in the slums.	スラムじゃ、めったにさかないのよ
かおり	香り	n	aroma, fragrance, scent, smell	Thank you, CLOUD. It smells wonderful.	ありがとう、CLOUD。ん～、いいかおり！
はいる	入る	v5r, vi	to enter, to go into,to break into,to join, to enroll,to contain, to hold, to accommodate,to have (an income of),to get, to receive, to score	Thudthudthud!!	『ドカドカドカ！！　というＳＥがはいるよてい』
おとうと	弟	n	younger brother, little brother, kid brother,pupil, apprentice	Thudthudthud!!	『ドカドカドカ！！　というＳＥがはいるよてい』
ごく	極	num	quite, very,10^48, quindecillion	You all right, BARRET?	BARRET、ごくろうさま
ろう	労	n	labor, labour, toil, trouble, pains, work, effort, striving	You all right, BARRET?	BARRET、ごくろうさま
さま	様	n	Mr., Mrs., Miss, Ms.,[object Object],state, situation, appearance	You all right, BARRET?	BARRET、ごくろうさま
かいぎ	会議	n, vs, adj-no	meeting, conference, session, assembly, council, convention, congress	Get in here, fools!! We're startin' the meetin'!!	おめえら！！会議をはじめっぞ！！
はじめ	始め	n	beginning, start, outset, opening,first (in line, etc.),origin,such as ..., not to mention ...	Get in here, fools!! We're startin' the meetin'!!	おめえら！！会議をはじめっぞ！！
おせわ	お世話	n	help, aid, assistance	We'll take care of you.	ちゃんとお世話するからね
どうぞ		adv	please, kindly, I beg of you,by all means, feel free, you are welcome,here you are	Sit down.	どうぞ、すわって
すわる	座る	v5r, vi	to sit, to squat,to assume (a position),to hold steady, to hold still	Sit down.	どうぞ、すわって
きぶん	気分	n	feeling, mood	I don't feel like it	いまはそんな気分じゃないな
つくる	作る	v5r, vt	to make, to produce, to manufacture, to build, to construct,to prepare (food), to brew (alcohol),to raise, to grow, to cultivate, to train,to till,to draw up (a document), to make out, to prepare, to write,to create (an artistic work, etc.), to compose,to coin (a phrase), to organize, to organise, to establish, to found,to have (a child),to make up (one's face, etc.),to fabricate (an excuse, etc.),to give a (false) appearance, to feign (a smile, etc.), to put on a show of emotion,to form (a line, etc.),to set (a record),to commit (a sin, etc.)	Everyone says my drinks taste the best!	お客さんだって、TIFAちゃんのつくるお酒はおいしいよっていってくれるんだから！
よる	因る	v5r, vi	to be due to, to be caused by,to depend on, to turn on,to be based on, to come from,to be based at (a location, an organization), to be headquartered at	Everyone says my drinks taste the best!	お客さんだって、TIFAちゃんのつくるお酒はおいしいよっていってくれるんだから！
ほっと		adv, vs	feeling relieved, (sigh of) relief	You know, I'm relieved you made it back safely.	なんだか、ほっとしちゃった。CLOUDが無事もどってきて
かなう	叶う	v5u	to come true (of a wish, prayer, etc.), to be realized, to be fulfilled,to suit (e.g. a purpose), to meet (wishes, ideals, etc.), to conform to (standards, rules, etc.), to be consistent with,to match (implies competition), to rival, to bear (e.g. the heat)	No reason. You just look a little tired I guess.	ううん、なんでもない。ただ、つかれてないのかなって…-
かくじつ	確実	adj-na, n	certainty, reliability, soundness	None. I'm positive.	いや、いなかった。それは確実だ
じしん	自信	n, vs	self-confidence, confidence (in oneself)	You sound pretty sure.	ずいぶんと自信たっぷりじゃねえか
たっぷり		adv, adv-to, n, adj-no, adj-na	full, in plenty, ample	You sound pretty sure.	ずいぶんと自信たっぷりじゃねえか
もし	若し	adv	if, in case, supposing	If there was anyone from SOLDIER you wouldn't be standing here now.	もしソルジャーと戦っていたらあんたたちが生きてるはずないからな
はず	筈	n	expectation that something took place, will take place or was in some state, it should be so, bound to be, expected to be, must be,nock (of a bow),nock (of an arrow),nock-shaped grip (between thumb and forefinger),wooden frame on the tip of the mast of a Japanese ship that prevents the hawser from falling out	If there was anyone from SOLDIER you wouldn't be standing here now.	もしソルジャーと戦っていたらあんたたちが生きてるはずないからな
おそらく	恐らく	adv	perhaps, likely, probably, I dare say	Probably all them guys in SOLDIER are.	おそらくソルジャーってのはみんな強いんだろうさ
はんらん	反乱	n, vs, adj-no	insurrection, mutiny, rebellion, revolt, uprising	But don't forget that your skinny ass's workin' for AVALANCHE now! Don't get no ideas bout hangin' on to Shinra.	でもな、おまえは反乱組織アバランチにやとわれてる身だ。神羅のかたを持つんじゃねえ！
そしき	組織	n, vs	organization, organisation, formation,structure, construction, setup, constitution,system (e.g. railroad, transport, party, etc.),tissue,texture (of a rock),weave (of a fabric)	But don't forget that your skinny ass's workin' for AVALANCHE now! Don't get no ideas bout hangin' on to Shinra.	でもな、おまえは反乱組織アバランチにやとわれてる身だ。神羅のかたを持つんじゃねえ！
かた	型	n	model, type (e.g. of machine, goods, etc.),type, style, pattern,mold (mould), template, model,kata (standard form of a movement, posture, etc. in martial arts, sport, etc.),form (i.e. customary procedure),size (i.e. clothing, shoes),inch (in diagonal display size),(taxonomical) form	But don't forget that your skinny ass's workin' for AVALANCHE now! Don't get no ideas bout hangin' on to Shinra.	でもな、おまえは反乱組織アバランチにやとわれてる身だ。神羅のかたを持つんじゃねえ！
しつ	質	n	quality, value,nature, inherent quality, character,logical quality	Stayin' with Shinra? You asked me a question and I answered it…that's all.	神羅のかたをもつ？俺はあんたの質間に答えただけだ
こたえる	答える	v1, vi	to answer, to reply	Stayin' with Shinra? You asked me a question and I answered it…that's all.	神羅のかたをもつ？俺はあんたの質間に答えただけだ
はなつ	放つ	v5t, vt	to fire (gun, arrow, questions, etc.), to shoot, to hit (e.g. baseball), to break wind,to set free, to release, to let loose,to emit (e.g. light), to give off (e.g. a scent),to send out (a person to carry out a duty),to set fire to	TIFA! Let him go!	TIFA！そんなヤツ放っておけ！
どうやら		adv	it seems like, it appears that,somehow or other	Looks like he still misses the Shinra!	どうやら神羅に未練タラタラらしいからな！
みれん	未練	n, adj-na	lingering attachment, lingering affection, regret, reluctance, ruefulness	Looks like he still misses the Shinra!	どうやら神羅に未練タラタラらしいからな！
たら	多羅	n	palmyra,lusterleaf holly,patra (silver incense dish placed in front of a Buddhist statue)	Looks like he still misses the Shinra!	どうやら神羅に未練タラタラらしいからな！
だまる	黙る	v5r, vi	to be silent, to say nothing	Shut up!	だまれ！
かん	管	n, n-suf	pipe, tube	But don't get me wrong!	でも、かんちがいするな！
かつどう	活動	n	action, activity,movie (esp. during the silent movie period)	I don't care about AVALANCHE or the Planet for that matter!	星の命にもおまえたちアバランチの活動にも興味はない！
もしかして	若しかして	exp, adv	perhaps, possibly, maybe, by any chance, if I'm not mistaken,if, in case, in the event that	You think I'm a little too uptight?	もしかして、俺、カタマってます？
きんちょう	緊張	n, vs	tension, mental strain, nervousness	The next mission will be to blow up the Sector 5 Reactor.	次の作戦は、五番魔晄炉爆破！！俺、緊張しちまって、ガチガチなんすよ
ガチガチ		adv, adj-no	chattering (teeth),(frozen, worried) stiff,rigid (personality, thinking, etc.), inflexible, overly serious,voracious (e.g. work, study), without slack or pause	The next mission will be to blow up the Sector 5 Reactor.	次の作戦は、五番魔晄炉爆破！！俺、緊張しちまって、ガチガチなんすよ
すねる	拗ねる	v1, vi	to be peevish, to sulk, to pout	CLOUD, you're great! Don't you ever get nervous?	CLOUDさんは、さっすがすね～。ぜんぜん緊張とかしないでしょ？
ぜんぜん	全然	adv	not at all (with neg. verb),wholly, entirely, completely	CLOUD, you're great! Don't you ever get nervous?	CLOUDさんは、さっすがすね～。ぜんぜん緊張とかしないでしょ？
からだ	体	n	body,torso, trunk,build, physique, constitution,health,corpse, dead body	Well, that's OK. Don't worry about me. I don't look like it, but I'm a coward at heart.	いや～、いいっすよ。気を使ってくれなくても。俺、体に似合わず、小心者っすから
にあう	似合う	v5u, vi	to suit, to match, to become, to be like	Well, that's OK. Don't worry about me. I don't look like it, but I'm a coward at heart.	いや～、いいっすよ。気を使ってくれなくても。俺、体に似合わず、小心者っすから
しょうしん	小心	n, adj-na	timidity, cowardice,prudence, pedantry	Well, that's OK. Don't worry about me. I don't look like it, but I'm a coward at heart.	いや～、いいっすよ。気を使ってくれなくても。俺、体に似合わず、小心者っすから
はなしかける	話しかける	v1, vt	to address (someone), to accost a person, to talk (to someone),to begin to talk, to start a conversation	You say you don't care, but you came to talk to me.	興味ないとかいいながら…俺に話しかけてる
じょうだん	冗談	n, adj-no	jest, joke, funny story	Blow off	冗談じゃない
こんなに		adv	so, like this, in this way	Hey, look at the news… What a blast.	見てよ、このニュース……。こんなに爆発してる
しじ	指示	n, vs	indication, denotation, designation,instructions, directions	Think it was all because of my bomb? But all I really did was just make it like the computer told me.	やっぱり、私の爆弾のせい？でも、このコンピューターの指示通り作っただけなのに
どおり	通り	n-suf	in accordance with, following,roughly, about,Street, Avenue	Think it was all because of my bomb? But all I really did was just make it like the computer told me.	やっぱり、私の爆弾のせい？でも、このコンピューターの指示通り作っただけなのに
けいさん	計算	n, vs	calculation, reckoning, count,forecast	Oh no! I must've made a miscalculation somewhere.	やだ！どっかで計算まちがったかしら
まちがう	間違う	v5u	to make a mistake, to be incorrect, to be mistaken	Oh no! I must've made a miscalculation somewhere.	やだ！どっかで計算まちがったかしら
はれ	晴れ	adj-no, n	clear weather, fine weather,formal, ceremonial, public,cleared of suspicion	Hey, that was my first bomb. Makes me kinda proud.	でも、私の爆弾の晴れぶたい。ちょっと、うれしいんだ
ぶた	豚	n	pig (Sus scrofa domesticus),pork,fatso, fatty	Hey, that was my first bomb. Makes me kinda proud.	でも、私の爆弾の晴れぶたい。ちょっと、うれしいんだ
い	胃	n	stomach,Chinese "stomach" constellation (one of the 28 mansions)	Hey, that was my first bomb. Makes me kinda proud.	でも、私の爆弾の晴れぶたい。ちょっと、うれしいんだ
まいる	参る	v5r, vi	to go, to come, to call,to be defeated, to collapse, to die,to be annoyed, to be nonplussed,to be madly in love,to visit (shrine, grave)	Oh my. It must have been for a lot of it.	ああ、まいったわ。たしか、高額って約束よね
こうがく	高額	adj-na, n, adj-no	large sum (money)	Oh my. It must have been for a lot of it.	ああ、まいったわ。たしか、高額って約束よね
くちやくそく	口約束	n, vs	verbal promise, one's word	Sure! Well, what the hell? It's a verbal agreement. Now let me figure this out.	う～ん！ま、いいか、口約束だし。さ、計算しなきゃ…
きこえる	聞こえる	v1, vi	to be heard, to be audible,to be said to be, to be reputed	Oh stop it, CLOUD! Did you hear me?	やだ！　CLOUD！聞こえちゃったかしら
はかい	破壊	n, vs	destruction, disruption,(application) crash	…today the No.1 Reactor was bombed. The terrorist group AVALANCHE has claimed responsibility for the bombing.	……壱番魔晄炉破壊事件に関してアバランチと名乗る組織から犯行声明が出されています
じけん	事件	n	event, affair, incident, case, plot, trouble, scandal	…today the No.1 Reactor was bombed. The terrorist group AVALANCHE has claimed responsibility for the bombing.	……壱番魔晄炉破壊事件に関してアバランチと名乗る組織から犯行声明が出されています
なのる	名乗る	v5r, vi	to give one's name (as), to introduce oneself (as),to claim to be, to call oneself, to wear the title of,to reveal oneself (as), to admit to being,to adopt as one's name, to take (a name),to call out the goods one is selling	…today the No.1 Reactor was bombed. The terrorist group AVALANCHE has claimed responsibility for the bombing.	……壱番魔晄炉破壊事件に関してアバランチと名乗る組織から犯行声明が出されています
はんこう	犯行	n	crime, criminal act, offence, offense	…today the No.1 Reactor was bombed. The terrorist group AVALANCHE has claimed responsibility for the bombing.	……壱番魔晄炉破壊事件に関してアバランチと名乗る組織から犯行声明が出されています
せいめい	声明	n, vs	declaration, statement, proclamation	…today the No.1 Reactor was bombed. The terrorist group AVALANCHE has claimed responsibility for the bombing.	……壱番魔晄炉破壊事件に関してアバランチと名乗る組織から犯行声明が出されています
こんご	今後	n-adv, n-t	from now on, hereafter	It is expected that AVALANCHE will continue its reign of terror.	声明によるとアバランチは今後も同様のテロを続けることを予告しております
どうよう	同様	adj-no, adj-na, n	identical, equal to, same (kind), like, similarity	It is expected that AVALANCHE will continue its reign of terror.	声明によるとアバランチは今後も同様のテロを続けることを予告しております
よこく	予告	n, vs	advance notice, previous note, preliminary announcement	It is expected that AVALANCHE will continue its reign of terror.	声明によるとアバランチは今後も同様のテロを続けることを予告しております
しみん	市民	n	citizen, citizenry, public,city inhabitant, townspeople,bourgeoisie, middle class	But citizens of Midgar, there is no need to fear.	しかし、ミッドガル市民のみなさん安心して下さい
みなさん	皆さん	n	all, everyone, everybody	But citizens of Midgar, there is no need to fear.	しかし、ミッドガル市民のみなさん安心して下さい
あんしん	安心	adj-na, n, vs	relief, peace of mind	But citizens of Midgar, there is no need to fear.	しかし、ミッドガル市民のみなさん安心して下さい
われわれ	我々	pn	we	I have immediately mobilized SOLDIER to protect our citizenry against this senseless violence. Thank you and good night.	我々神羅カンパニーはこのような暴力からみなさんを守るためにソルジャーの投入を決定しました。これで……
ぼうりょく	暴力	n	violence, mayhem	I have immediately mobilized SOLDIER to protect our citizenry against this senseless violence. Thank you and good night.	我々神羅カンパニーはこのような暴力からみなさんを守るためにソルジャーの投入を決定しました。これで……
まもる	守る	v5r, vt	to protect, to guard, to defend,to keep (i.e. a promise), to abide (by the rules), to observe, to obey, to follow	I have immediately mobilized SOLDIER to protect our citizenry against this senseless violence. Thank you and good night.	我々神羅カンパニーはこのような暴力からみなさんを守るためにソルジャーの投入を決定しました。これで……
とうにゅう	投入	n, vs	throwing into, inserting, depositing,investment, putting in (personnel, etc.),release of a product,making (an electrical circuit)	I have immediately mobilized SOLDIER to protect our citizenry against this senseless violence. Thank you and good night.	我々神羅カンパニーはこのような暴力からみなさんを守るためにソルジャーの投入を決定しました。これで……
ほうる	放る	v5r, vt	to throw, to fling, to hurl, to toss,to neglect, to abandon, to leave alone, to give up on, to leave undone, to leave unfinished	Shucks!! …money…	チッ！！……………ほ、報酬かよ…
あやまる	誤る	v5r, vi	to make a mistake, to err,to mislead, to misguide	Straighten things up with everyone for me.	みんなには、あやまっておくね
セーブポイント		n	save point	Save Point	【セーブポイント】
メニュー		n	menu,schedule, program, programme,(computer) menu	Access the menu and select [SAVE] to save your game.	メニューを開いて　セーブ　を選ぶとゲームの状態を保存できます。
ひらく	開く	v5k, vi	to open, to undo, to unseal, to unpack,to bloom, to unfold, to spread out,to open (for business, e.g. in the morning),to be wide (gap, etc.), to widen,to hold (meeting, etc.), to give, to open,to found (nation, dynasty, sect, etc.), to open (a new business), to set up, to establish, to start,to open (ports, borders, etc.),to open (an account),to open up (new land, path, etc.), to clear, to develop,to open (a file, etc.),to extract (root), to reduce (equation),to cut open (fish),to change (kanji into hiragana),to flare (e.g. skirt),to slacken (into a poor posture)	Access the menu and select [SAVE] to save your game.	メニューを開いて　セーブ　を選ぶとゲームの状態を保存できます。
セーブ		n, vs	save,checking, curbing, suppressing, restraining, controlling, being economical	Access the menu and select [SAVE] to save your game.	メニューを開いて　セーブ　を選ぶとゲームの状態を保存できます。
えらぶ	選ぶ	v5b, vt	to choose, to select	Access the menu and select [SAVE] to save your game.	メニューを開いて　セーブ　を選ぶとゲームの状態を保存できます。
ゲーム		n	game	Access the menu and select [SAVE] to save your game.	メニューを開いて　セーブ　を選ぶとゲームの状態を保存できます。
ほぞん	保存	n, vs	preservation, conservation, storage, maintenance,saving (e.g. to disk)	Access the menu and select [SAVE] to save your game.	メニューを開いて　セーブ　を選ぶとゲームの状態を保存できます。
おねがい	お願い	int	request, wish,please	Listen, CLOUD. I'm asking you. Please join us.	CLOUD、おねがい。力をかして
かす	貸す	v5s, vt	to lend, to loan,to rent out, to hire out	Listen, CLOUD. I'm asking you. Please join us.	CLOUD、おねがい。力をかして
やむ	病む	v5m, vi, vt	to fall ill, to suffer from, to have something wrong with	The Planet is dying. Slowly but surely, it's dying.	星が病んでるの。このままじゃ死んじゃう
なんとか	何とか	adv	something, something or other, so-and-so,somehow, anyhow, one way or another	Someone has to do something.	誰かがなんとかしなくちゃならないの
なんと	何と	adv	what, how, whatever	So let BARRET and his buddies do something about it. It's got nothin' to do with me.	BARRETたちがなんとかするんだろ？俺には関係ないさ
かする	科する	vs-s	to inflict, to impose (a fine, etc.)	So let BARRET and his buddies do something about it. It's got nothin' to do with me.	BARRETたちがなんとかするんだろ？俺には関係ないさ
はっぴょう	発表	n, vs	announcement, publication, presenting, statement, communique, making known, breaking (news story), expressing (one's opinion), releasing, unveiling	The president of Shinra is going to read a statement.	プレジデント神羅の発表がニュースで読まれるの
よむ	読む	v5m, vt	to read,to count,to guess, to predict, to read (someone's thoughts), to see (e.g. into someone's heart), to divine	The president of Shinra is going to read a statement.	プレジデント神羅の発表がニュースで読まれるの
きらい	嫌い	n	disliked, hated, disagreeable,tendency, smack (of), touch (of),distinction, discrimination	But I still hate BARRET	でも、BARRETがきらい-
はなす	話す	v5s, vt	to talk, to speak, to converse, to chat,to tell, to explain, to narrate, to mention, to describe, to discuss,to speak (a language)	Don't worry. I'll talk to him.	だいじょうぶ。私からちゃんと話しておくから
いみ	意味	n, vs	meaning, significance, sense	I don't know what you mean.	それどういう意味かしら
てれる	照れる	v1, vi	to be shy, to be bashful, to feel awkward, to feel embarrassed	Sorry, CLOUD. Marlene seems a little shy.	CLOUD、ごめんね。マリン、てれちゃってるみたい-
さかずき	杯	n	sake cup, cup for alcoholic beverages	Aaah!! Nothin' like that first drink after a job.	ああ～！！仕事の後の一杯はこたえらんねぇなぁ
こたえる	応える	v1, vi	to respond, to answer, to meet (e.g. demands, expectations),to affect, to take a toll, to strike home, to have an effect on, to be hard on someone (e.g. heat, cold, work, illness, etc.), to be a strain	Aaah!! Nothin' like that first drink after a job.	ああ～！！仕事の後の一杯はこたえらんねぇなぁ
らん	欄	n, n-suf	column of text (e.g. in a newspaper),field (in a form, web page, etc.)	Aaah!! Nothin' like that first drink after a job.	ああ～！！仕事の後の一杯はこたえらんねぇなぁ
こころがけ	心がけ	n	(mental) attitude, way of thinking, attention, care, prudence, intention	Oh!! That's more like it!!	おっ！！いい心がけじゃねぇか！！
こく	放く	v5k, vt	to let loose (e.g. a fart),to utter (e.g. a lie),to do	Even if you were with SOLDIER, you're still a rookie here. So you'd better listen to whatever I tell ya!	元ソルジャーでもここじゃおめえも新人だ。新人にとっちゃ先輩の言うことは絶対だからな！
しんじん	新人	n, adj-no	new face, newcomer, rookie, fresh recruit,modern humans (from Cro-Magnon man onwards)	Even if you were with SOLDIER, you're still a rookie here. So you'd better listen to whatever I tell ya!	元ソルジャーでもここじゃおめえも新人だ。新人にとっちゃ先輩の言うことは絶対だからな！
せんぱい	先輩	n	senior (at work or school), superior, elder, older graduate, progenitor, old-timer	Even if you were with SOLDIER, you're still a rookie here. So you'd better listen to whatever I tell ya!	元ソルジャーでもここじゃおめえも新人だ。新人にとっちゃ先輩の言うことは絶対だからな！
ぜったい	絶対	n	absolutely, unconditionally,absolute, unconditional, unmistakable,absoluteness	Even if you were with SOLDIER, you're still a rookie here. So you'd better listen to whatever I tell ya!	元ソルジャーでもここじゃおめえも新人だ。新人にとっちゃ先輩の言うことは絶対だからな！
のめる		v5r, vi	to fall forward	What!? You tellin' me you're too good to drink with me?	なに～！！おれさまの酒がのめないってかぁ？
りょうり	料理	n, vs	cooking, cookery, cuisine,dealing with something, handling, administration, management	TIFA really knows how to cook.  Mmm…	TIFAちゃんの料理っておいしいっすねえ。パクパク……
ぱくぱく		adv, adv-to, vs	repeatedly opening and closing (one's mouth), gasping,flapping (e.g. shoe sole), gaping open and shut,heartily (eating), devouring, munching, gobbling	TIFA really knows how to cook.  Mmm…	TIFAちゃんの料理っておいしいっすねえ。パクパク……
いつも	何時も	adv, n	always, usually, every time,never	TIFA always lets me taste her cooking.	TIFAちゃんっていつも俺に、料理の味見させるっすよ
あじみ	味見	n, vs	tasting, sampling	TIFA always lets me taste her cooking.	TIFAちゃんっていつも俺に、料理の味見させるっすよ
ひょうばん	評判	n, adj-no	fame, reputation, popularity,rumour (rumor), talk	Don't know whether I should be happy or sad. But it's the good food and drinks that make this shop famous.	うれしいやら、悲しいやら。おいしい料理とお酒が評判でお店ははんじょうしてるんですけどね
はんじる	判じる	v1, vt	to judge, to decide,to solve, to decipher, to puzzle out, to interpret,to divine, to guess, to make out	Don't know whether I should be happy or sad. But it's the good food and drinks that make this shop famous.	うれしいやら、悲しいやら。おいしい料理とお酒が評判でお店ははんじょうしてるんですけどね
ドキドキ		vs	thump-thump, bang-bang, pit-a-pat, pitapat, pitter-patter,to beat fast (of one's heart), to throb, to pound, to palpitate	Hey Wedge, you're getting all excited.	う♥か♥つ♥……なんだか、ドキドキしてる
なぜ	何故	adv	why, how	Stop making such a mess!	なぜなの…？
やけ	自棄	n, adj-no, adj-na	desperation, despair, self-abandonment	What's goin' on? It's really shakin' a lot…	どうなってる……？やけにゆれるな……
ゆれる	揺れる	v1, vi	to shake, to sway, to waver	What's goin' on? It's really shakin' a lot…	どうなってる……？やけにゆれるな……
どこ	何処	pn	where, what place,how much (long, far), what extent	TIFA? Where?	TIFA……？どこだ？
むかう	向かう	v5u, vi	to face,to go towards, to head towards	…I'm going out…	……俺はどこへ向かっている……
へそくり	臍繰り	n	secret savings, stash	Received BARRET's stash, 1500 gil!	BARRETのへそくり１５００ギル手にいれた！
きく	効く	v5k, vi	to be effective, to show effect,to do its work, to carry out its function well,to be possible to use	You're just going to walk right out ignoring your childhood friend!?	かわいい幼なじみのたのみもきかずに行っちゃうんだ！-
うむ	生む	v5m, vt	to give birth, to bear (child), to lay (eggs),to produce, to yield, to give rise to, to deliver	You're just going to walk right out ignoring your childhood friend!?	かわいい幼なじみのたのみもきかずに行っちゃうんだ！-
おもいだす	思い出す	v5s, vt	to recall, to remember, to recollect	Remember? CLOUD, it was seven years ago…	思い出して……CLOUD。あれは７年前よ……
あれ	彼	n	that (indicating something distant from both speaker and listener (in space, time or psychologically), or something understood without naming it directly),that person (used to refer to one's equals or inferiors),over there,down there (i.e. one's genitals),period, menses,hey (expression of surprise, suspicion, etc.), huh?, eh?,that (something mentioned before which is distant psychologically or in terms of time)	Remember? CLOUD, it was seven years ago…	思い出して……CLOUD。あれは７年前よ……
とし	年	n	year,age, years,past one's prime, old age	Remember? CLOUD, it was seven years ago…	思い出して……CLOUD。あれは７年前よ……
むら	村	n	village	Look, the well.	ほら、村の給水塔
きゅうすい	給水	n, vs	water supply	Look, the well.	ほら、村の給水塔
なかなか	中々	adj-no	very, considerably, easily, readily, fairly, quite, highly, rather,by no means, not readily,middle, half-way point,excellent, wonderful, very good	I thought you would never come, and I was getting a little cold.	TIFA、なかなか来なくてちょっと寒かったな
はる	春	n-adv, n-t	spring, springtime,New Year,prime (of one's life, etc.),adolescence, puberty,sexuality	Come this Spring…I'm leaving town for Midgar.	俺……春になったら村を出てミッドガルへ行くよ
おとこのこ	男の子	exp, n	boy, male child, baby boy	All the boys are leaving town.	……男の子たちってみ～んな村を出てっちゃうね
ちがう	違う	exp	to differ (from), to vary,to not be in the usual condition,to not match the correct (answer, etc.),to be different from promised,isn't it?, wasn't it?	But I'm different from them. I'm not just going to find a job.	俺はみんなとはちがう。ただ仕事をさがすだけじゃない
さがす	探す	v5s, vt	to search (for something desired, needed), to look for,to search (for something lost), to seek (a suspect in a crime)	But I'm different from them. I'm not just going to find a job.	俺はみんなとはちがう。ただ仕事をさがすだけじゃない
さいこう	最高	adj-no, adj-na, n	most, highest, maximum, uppermost, supreme,best, wonderful, finest	I'm going to be the best there is, just like Sephiroth!	セフィロスみたいな最高のソルジャーに
えいゆう	英雄	n	hero, heroine, great person,Eroica Symphony (Beethoven, 1804),Heroic Polonaise (Chopin)	Sephiroth… The Great Sephiroth?	セフィロス……英雄セフィロス、か
ねる	寝る	v1, vi	to lie down,to go to bed, to lie in bed,to sleep (lying down),to sleep (with someone, i.e. have intercourse),to lie idle	I thought about Sephiroth all the time. Even in my sleep. My mom had given up on me.	あのころの俺は、ねてもさめてもセフィロス、セフィロス……母さんもあきれていたな
かあさん	母さん	n	mother,wife	I thought about Sephiroth all the time. Even in my sleep. My mom had given up on me.	あのころの俺は、ねてもさめてもセフィロス、セフィロス……母さんもあきれていたな
あきれる	呆れる	v1, vi	to be amazed, to be shocked, to be astonished, to be astounded, to be disgusted, to be exasperated	I thought about Sephiroth all the time. Even in my sleep. My mom had given up on me.	あのころの俺は、ねてもさめてもセフィロス、セフィロス……母さんもあきれていたな
しばらく	暫く	int	for a moment, for a minute,for a while, for some time,for the time being, for now,it's been a long time, long time no see	…I probably won't be able to come back to this town for a while.	……しばらくのあいだ村にはもどれないな、きっと
かつやく	活躍	vs	activity (esp. energetic), great efforts, conspicuous service,to flourish, to participate actively, to play an active role	If you make it, will you be in the newspapers?	大活躍したら新聞にものるかな？
しんぶん	新聞	n	newspaper	If you make it, will you be in the newspapers?	大活躍したら新聞にものるかな？
ゆうめい	有名	n	famous,fame	Umm…if you get really famous and I'm ever in a bind…	あのね、CLOUDが有名になってその時、私が困ってたら……
たすけ	助け	n	assistance, help, aid, support, reinforcement	you'll come save me, all right?	CLOUD、私を助けに来てね
ピンチ		n	crisis, tough spot, predicament, pinch,clothespin	If I'm ever in trouble, my hero will come and rescue me.	私がピンチのときにヒーローがあらわれて助けてくれるの
ヒーロー		n	hero	If I'm ever in trouble, my hero will come and rescue me.	私がピンチのときにヒーローがあらわれて助けてくれるの
あらわれる	現れる	v1, vi	to appear, to come in sight, to become visible, to come out, to embody, to materialize, to materialise,to be expressed (e.g. emotions), to become apparent (e.g. trends, effects)	If I'm ever in trouble, my hero will come and rescue me.	私がピンチのときにヒーローがあらわれて助けてくれるの
たび	度	n, n-suf, ctr	time (three times, each time, etc.), times	I want to experience that at least once.	一度くらい経験したいじゃない？
けいけん	経験	n, vs	experience	I want to experience that at least once.	一度くらい経験したいじゃない？
わらう	笑う	v5u, vi	to laugh,to smile,to sneer, to ridicule,to be dumbfounded, to be flabbergasted	You're laughing at me!	笑ったわね！
なさる	為さる	v5aru, vt	to do	Come on! Promise me!	いいじゃないのよ～！約束しなさい～！
じつげん	実現	n, vs	implementation (e.g. of a system), materialization, materialisation, realization, realisation	But you got your childhood dream, didn't you? You joined SOLDIER.	でも子供のころの夢を実現したでしょ？ちゃんとソルジャーになったんだもの
しける	時化る	v1, vi	to be stormy or choppy (sea),to go through hard times, to be broke,to be gloomy, to be glum	This is my pay? Don't make me laugh.	こんな、しけた報酬じょうだんじゃないな
ミッション		n	mission,delegation,transmission	You got the next mission lined up? I'll do it for 3000.	次のミッションはあるのか？倍額の３０００でうけてやってもいい
ばいがく	倍額	n	double amount	You got the next mission lined up? I'll do it for 3000.	次のミッションはあるのか？倍額の３０００でうけてやってもいい
うける	受ける	v1, vi	to receive, to get,to catch (e.g. a ball),to be struck by (wind, waves, sunlight, etc.),to sustain (damage), to incur (a loss), to suffer (an injury), to feel (influence),to undergo (e.g. surgery), to take (a test), to accept (a challenge),to be given (e.g. life, talent),to find funny, to find humorous, to be amused (by),to follow, to succeed, to be descended from,to face (south, etc.),to be modified by,to obtain (a pawned item, etc.) by paying a fee,to be well-received, to become popular, to go down well	You got the next mission lined up? I'll do it for 3000.	次のミッションはあるのか？倍額の３０００でうけてやってもいい
ひとで	海星	n	starfish, sea star, asteroid, [object Object],northern Pacific seastar (Asterias amurensis)	…psst…. (We're really hurting for help, right?)	ヒソヒソ……（人手に困ってるってのが本音でしょ？）
ほんね	本音	n	real intention, motive, true opinion, what one really thinks	…psst…. (We're really hurting for help, right?)	ヒソヒソ……（人手に困ってるってのが本音でしょ？）
がくひ	学費	n	tuition, school expenses	Uh….ugh…. (That money's for Marlene's schoolin'….)	う……ぐぅ……（残りのへそくりはマリンの学費だぞ……）
ひょうてき	標的	n	target	Our target's the Sector 5 Reactor. Head for the station first.	標的は【五番魔晄炉】だ。まず、駅へ行く
まず	先ず	adv	first (of all), to start with, about, almost, anyway, well, now,hardly (with neg. verb)	Our target's the Sector 5 Reactor. Head for the station first.	標的は【五番魔晄炉】だ。まず、駅へ行く
ぶき	武器	n	weapon, arms, ordnance,weapon (something used to gain an advantage), asset	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
や	屋	n	(something) shop,somebody who sells (something) or works as (something),somebody with a (certain) personality trait,house,roof	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
かい	階	ctr	storey, story, floor,stairs,stage (in chronostratigraphy),counter for storeys and floors of a building	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
おやじ	親字	n	first character (of a dictionary entry)	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
でんごん	伝言	n, vs	verbal message, word (from someone)	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
にわとり	鶏	n	(domestic) chicken,chicken (meat)	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
つたえる	伝える	v1, vt	to convey, to report, to transmit, to communicate, to tell, to impart, to propagate, to teach, to bequeath	Got a message from the old man at the weapon shop upstairs! Said he's got somethin' special so come and get it!	武器屋２階のオヤジからの伝言だ！いいもんあげるからとりにこい……たしかに伝えたぞ！
じつは	実は	exp, adv	as a matter of fact, by the way, to tell you the truth, to be honest, frankly	I, uh… I don't really know how to use Materia!	じつはな……オレはマテリアの使い方をよくしらねえ！
つかいかた	使い方	n	way to use something, treatment, management (of help)	I, uh… I don't really know how to use Materia!	じつはな……オレはマテリアの使い方をよくしらねえ！
ひろう	疲労	n, vs	fatigue, weariness	I'll give you that Materia we found. Just teach me how to use it!	ひろったマテリアはおまえにくれてやる。だから、教えろ！
ひみつ	秘密	n	secret, secrecy, confidentiality, privacy,mystery,secret (e.g. to success),esoteric teachings	So this is what makes them guys in SOLDIER so great, huh!?	ソルジャーさんたちの秘密ってわけか
かんり	管理	n, vs	control, management (e.g. of a business)	Ok. I'll ask Jessie again later. But you're in charge of the Materia!	まあ、いいだろう。あとで、ジェシーにでも聞いておくからな。だがな、マテリアはおまえが管理しろ！
それほど	それ程	adv	to that degree, to that extent, that much	&$*#! What's this, It wasn't that tough!' crap?	ケッ！　なにが……『それほど、むずかしくはないだろう』だ！
おじさん	伯父さん	n	uncle,old man, mister,manybar goatfish (Parupeneus multifasciatus)	CLOUD! I got a message from the Weapon Shop man upstairs.	CLOUD！武器屋２階のおじさんから伝言よ
つけ	付け	n	bill, bill of sale, payment invoice,tab (for later payment), credit,contact move (in go), direct attack to an enemy stone,sound effect produced by striking with clappers a wooden board in kabuki,letter,reason, motive, pretext,one's fortune, one's luck	Sector 7 Item Store	マテリアの付け替えができるようになります。
かえ	替え	n	change, alteration, substitute, spare, proxy,rate of exchange	Sector 7 Item Store	マテリアの付け替えができるようになります。
どうぐ	道具	n	tool, implement, instrument, utensil, apparatus, device,means,furniture	Ahh… Another slow day…	７番街・道具屋
もうこ	猛虎	n	fierce tiger, ferocious tiger,Hanshin Tigers (baseball team)	Can't sell any really good medicine in a slum like this.	もうこの店もダメかのう…
まとも	真面	adj-na, n	the front,honesty, uprightness, directness,decency, normality	Oh!! Look at this! This doesn't happen everyday. Are you…a customer?	こんなスラムじゃまともなクスリは売れんなあ
うれる	売れる	v1, vi	to sell (well),to be well known, to be popular, to be famous	Oh!! Look at this! This doesn't happen everyday. Are you…a customer?	こんなスラムじゃまともなクスリは売れんなあ
まさか	真逆	adv, adj-no	by no means, never!, well, I never!, you don't say!, certainly (not),something unexpected, emergency,currently, for the time being, presently, for now,indeed, really, truly, unexpectedly	Yes!! Welcome!! We sell! We buy!	おっ！！こりゃこりゃ！こりゃ、めずらしい。あんた、まさか客かね？
きゃく	客	n	guest, visitor,customer, client, shopper, spectator, audience, tourist, sightseer, passenger	Yes!! Welcome!! We sell! We buy!	おっ！！こりゃこりゃ！こりゃ、めずらしい。あんた、まさか客かね？
あむ	編む	v5m, vt	to knit, to plait, to braid,to compile (anthology, dictionary, etc.), to edit	He, HEY! Waitaminit you!!	ところで、あんた。もしかして……
しつれい	失礼	vs	discourtesy, impoliteness,excuse me, goodbye,to leave,to be rude	Might be unhealthy fer ya, if ya know what I mean.	失礼、失礼」
そうぞう	想像	n, vs, adj-no	imagination, guess	Yep, that's me	買わねえとどんなめにあうか……想像してみりゃ、わかるよな
しろうと	素人	n	amateur, layman, ordinary person, novice,respectable woman (not a prostitute, hostess, geisha, etc.),unlicensed prostitute	the name's CLOUD	俺に話しかけるってことは、しろうとだな？
さいしょ	最初	adj-no, n-adv, n-t	beginning, outset, first, onset	Hmmph!! Well, I never heard of ya!	それがどうした。誰だって最初は素人だろ
よう	用	n	business, task, errand, engagement,use, purpose,for the use of ..., used for ..., made for ...,call of nature, excretion	Don't act so big, amateur. Seein' as how I'm such a warm hearted guy, I'll show ya the ropes.	俺は元ソルジャーのCLOUDだ。おまえに用などない
ふん	分	n	minute (unit of time),fun (one tenth of a monme, 5.787 grains)	You come back here tomorrow. I got some things I gots ta do.	フン！！おまえの名前なんて聞いてねぇよ
くせ	癖	n	habit (often a bad habit, i.e. vice), tendency,peculiarity, idiosyncrasy, mannerism,crease, wrinkle, curl, kink	Heh heh…He'll forget about it. OH, you!!	素人のくせにいばるんじゃねぇ。親切な俺様がこんせつていねいに教えてやるぜ！
しんせつ	親切	adj-na, n	kind, gentle, considerate, generous, friendly, nice	Heh heh…He'll forget about it. OH, you!!	素人のくせにいばるんじゃねぇ。親切な俺様がこんせつていねいに教えてやるぜ！
こむ	込む	aux-v	to be crowded, to be packed,to be complex,to go into, to put into, to remain (seated), to be plunged into (silence), to do thoroughly,to do intently,to continue in the same state	Heh heh…He'll forget about it. OH, you!!	素人のくせにいばるんじゃねぇ。親切な俺様がこんせつていねいに教えてやるぜ！
ていねい	丁寧	adj-na, n	polite, courteous, civil,careful, close, thorough, conscientious	Heh heh…He'll forget about it. OH, you!!	素人のくせにいばるんじゃねぇ。親切な俺様がこんせつていねいに教えてやるぜ！
あさ	朝	n-adv, n-t	morning	Get my friend on the second floor to teach ya.	明日の朝に顔あらってでなおしてきな。俺様だって準備が必要だからな
あらう	洗う	v5u, vt	to wash, to cleanse, to rinse,to inquire into, to investigate,to purify (one's heart),to lave (e.g. shore), to wash over (e.g. deck), to sweep	Get my friend on the second floor to teach ya.	明日の朝に顔あらってでなおしてきな。俺様だって準備が必要だからな
でなおす	出直す	v5s, vi	to make a fresh start, to turn over a new leaf,to call again, to visit again, to come again	Get my friend on the second floor to teach ya.	明日の朝に顔あらってでなおしてきな。俺様だって準備が必要だからな
じゅんび	準備	n, vs	preparation, setup, arrangements, provision, reserve	Get my friend on the second floor to teach ya.	明日の朝に顔あらってでなおしてきな。俺様だって準備が必要だからな
ひつよう	必要	n	necessary, needed, essential, indispensable,necessity, need, requirement	Get my friend on the second floor to teach ya.	明日の朝に顔あらってでなおしてきな。俺様だって準備が必要だからな
ばん	晩	ctr	evening,counter for nights	Crap!! Watch it, you old guy!	てへへ…一晩じゃ、おぼえきれんぜ。おう！素人！！悪いが、二階のあいぼうから教わってくれ
きれる	切れる	aux-v, v1	to break, to snap, to be cut, to split, to crack,to be injured,to wear out, to be worn out,to break, to burst, to collapse,to wear off, to stop working, to go dead,to expire (time limit, etc.), to run out, to become due,to run out (of stock, etc.), to be exhausted, to be used up, to be sold out, to be out of,to be broken off (e.g. of a relationship), to break up, to have severed ties, to be cut off, to be disconnected,to cut well, to be sharp,to be sharp-minded, to be keen, to be shrewd, to be quick-witted, to be able,to be short of, to drop under (a certain figure), to beat (e.g. a record time),to dry off,to curve, to veer,to shuffle (cards),to get angry, to snap, to blow one's top, to lose one's temper, to flip,to be able to do completely	Crap!! Watch it, you old guy!	てへへ…一晩じゃ、おぼえきれんぜ。おう！素人！！悪いが、二階のあいぼうから教わってくれ
あい	愛	n	love, affection, care,attachment, craving, desire	Crap!! Watch it, you old guy!	てへへ…一晩じゃ、おぼえきれんぜ。おう！素人！！悪いが、二階のあいぼうから教わってくれ
ぼう	棒	n	pole, rod, stick	Crap!! Watch it, you old guy!	てへへ…一晩じゃ、おぼえきれんぜ。おう！素人！！悪いが、二階のあいぼうから教わってくれ
おそわる	教わる	v5r, vi	to be taught (by), to learn from	Crap!! Watch it, you old guy!	てへへ…一晩じゃ、おぼえきれんぜ。おう！素人！！悪いが、二階のあいぼうから教わってくれ
おっさん		n	middle-aged man,Buddhist priest	I was just about to rip up that smooth little head of yours!	チッ！！　おっさん！！気をつけてくれよ！
あたま	頭	n	head,hair (on one's head),mind, brains, intellect,leader, chief, boss, captain,top, tip,beginning, start,head, person,top structural component of a kanji,pair	In the slums ya gotta take care of yourself first.	あんたのツンツン頭をブチぬいちまうとこだぜ！
ぬう	縫う	v5u, vt	to sew, to stitch,to weave one's way (e.g. through a crowd)	In the slums ya gotta take care of yourself first.	あんたのツンツン頭をブチぬいちまうとこだぜ！
がき	餓鬼	n	brat, kid, urchin, little devil,preta, hungry ghost	I been livin' like that ever since I was a kid.	スラムじゃ、自分の身は自分で守る。ガキのころから、そんな生き方さ
タフ		adj-na	tough	You wanna be tough like me? Then you gotta pick out some good weapons.	オレみたいにタフな男の子になりたかったらいかす武器を選ぶこったな
いかす	生かす	v5s, vt	to make (the best) use of, to put to good use, to leverage (skills, attributes, experience, etc.), to capitalise on (experience, etc.),to let live, to keep alive,to revive, to resuscitate, to bring back to life,to restore (a deleted passage; in proofreading)	You wanna be tough like me? Then you gotta pick out some good weapons.	オレみたいにタフな男の子になりたかったらいかす武器を選ぶこったな
こる	凝る	v5r, vi	to grow stiff,to be absorbed in, to be devoted to, to be a fanatic, to elaborate	You wanna be tough like me? Then you gotta pick out some good weapons.	オレみたいにタフな男の子になりたかったらいかす武器を選ぶこったな
そうだん	相談	n, vs	consultation, discussion, discussing, asking (somebody) for advice	Oh and uh, by the way old guy…	でな、おっさん。相談なんだが……
びん	瓶	n	bottle, jar, decanter, flagon, phial, vial	You can see this store don't have no customers… and even tough guys like me could use a buck or two…	見ての通り、この武器屋には客がいない。タフな男の子のこのオレもびんぼうってわけさ
こづかい	小遣い	n	pocket money, spending money, pin money, allowance	Ya think you could spare some cash?	というわけで……このオレに、こづかいくれないかな？
わたす	渡す	v5s, vt	to ferry across (e.g. a river), to carry across, to traverse,to lay across, to build across,to hand over, to hand in, to pass, to give, to transfer	Give him some	金渡す
しめる	締める	v1, vt	to tie, to fasten, to tighten,to wear (necktie, belt), to put on,to total, to sum,to be strict with,to economize, to economise, to cut down on,to salt, to marinate, to pickle, to make sushi adding a mixture of vinegar and salt	YESSS…	しめしめ……
あね	姉	n	older sister, elder sister	Hey old guy! I got a good-lookin' sister!!	オレの姉キは美人だぞ！！おっさん！！
びじん	美人	n	beautiful woman	Hey old guy! I got a good-lookin' sister!!	オレの姉キは美人だぞ！！おっさん！！
じょうけん	条件	n	condition, term, requirement, qualification, prerequisite	There's just one condition.	それにはひとつ条件があるぜ
へや	部屋	n	room, chamber,apartment, flat, pad,stable	Go ahead 'n' help yourself to the room.	いいぜ、部屋は自由に使ってくれ
じゆう	自由	exp, adj-na, n	freedom, liberty, as it pleases you	Go ahead 'n' help yourself to the room.	いいぜ、部屋は自由に使ってくれ
まわる	回る	v5r, vi	to turn, to revolve,to visit several places,to function well,to pass a certain time	Geez, dude, you're really old. You sure you ain't poorer than me?	おっさん、やきがまわったな。オレよりびんぼうじゃねえか
すき	隙	n	gap, space,break, interlude, interval,chink (in one's armor, armour), chance, opportunity, weak spot,breach (of a relationship between people)	Use whatever bed you want. Sleep tight, old guy.	すきなベッドで休んでいきな。いい夢見なよな、おっさん
ベッド		n	bed	Use whatever bed you want. Sleep tight, old guy.	すきなベッドで休んでいきな。いい夢見なよな、おっさん
ゆめみ	夢見	n	having a dream	Use whatever bed you want. Sleep tight, old guy.	すきなベッドで休んでいきな。いい夢見なよな、おっさん
やすめる	休める	v1, vt	to rest, to suspend, to give relief	This is a slum, so don't think you can stay for free.	ただで休めるほどスラムの街はあまくはないぜ
ごうじょう	強情	adj-na, n	obstinate, stubborn, headstrong	Tough guy, huh!? You'd better sleep when you can.	強情だな！　もうっ！休めるときに休む
きほん	基本	n, adj-no	basics, fundamentals, basis, foundation	That's the trick to being tough. Remember that, old dude.	これがタフに生きてく基本だぜ！おっさん、覚えときな
くろう	苦労	n, vs	trouble, hardship, difficulty, labour, labor, toil, pains,anxiety, worry, concern, cares	Rough times, huh pop? Not a dime on you?	おっさん、苦労してんだな。金もってないじゃないか！
しょしんしゃ	初心者	n	beginner	Beginner's Hall	初心者の館
やかた	館	n	mansion, palace, manor house, castle,nobleman, noblewoman, dignitary,cabin (on a boat, carriage, etc.)	Beginner's Hall	初心者の館
ぶがい	部外	n	outside the department	Unn!! Who the hell are you!? No unauthorized access.	ん………！！なんだ、てめぇは？ここは部外者立ち入り禁止だぞ
たちいり	立ち入り	n, vs	entering, going into	Unn!! Who the hell are you!? No unauthorized access.	ん………！！なんだ、てめぇは？ここは部外者立ち入り禁止だぞ
きんし	禁止	n, vs	prohibition, inhibition, ban	Unn!! Who the hell are you!? No unauthorized access.	ん………！！なんだ、てめぇは？ここは部外者立ち入り禁止だぞ
ききあきる	聞き飽きる	v1, vt	to be tired of hearing	You must be sick of hearing it… But it's been so long since there was any real news here.	そうか、もう聞きあきちまったか…。ひさしぶりのでかいニュースだからよ。先行きが、気になるよな
ひさし	庇	n	eaves (of roof),narrow aisle surrounding the core of a temple building,visor (of a cap), brim, peak,classic Japanese women's low pompadour hairstyle	You must be sick of hearing it… But it's been so long since there was any real news here.	そうか、もう聞きあきちまったか…。ひさしぶりのでかいニュースだからよ。先行きが、気になるよな
ぶり	振り	suf	style, manner,after (period of time) again (e.g. meeting again after a year), for the first time in (period of time)	You must be sick of hearing it… But it's been so long since there was any real news here.	そうか、もう聞きあきちまったか…。ひさしぶりのでかいニュースだからよ。先行きが、気になるよな
さきゆき	先行き	n	the future, future prospects	You must be sick of hearing it… But it's been so long since there was any real news here.	そうか、もう聞きあきちまったか…。ひさしぶりのでかいニュースだからよ。先行きが、気になるよな
しゅうだん	集団	n	group, mass	You're worried where it's all heading, right? Everyone's in a buzz 'bout that terrorist group AVALANCHE blowin' up the Sector 1 Mako Reactor.	なんでもよう……アバランチとかいうテロ集団が壱番魔晄炉を爆破したって話だ
もてる	持てる	adj-f	to be able to possess (hold, get, etc.),to be well liked, to be popular, to be pampered (spoiled, doted upon, etc.), to be welcomed,to endure (the tests of time, the elements, etc.), to last,possessed, held,rich, wealthy, affluent	On the surface they say they're an anti-Shinra group, but in reality…	おもてむきは、反神羅がどうしたとかって声明がでてるらしいがよ。真相はな……
むき	向き	n	direction, orientation, aspect, exposure,suited to, suitable for, designed for,tendency, inclination,nature (of a request or desire),person	On the surface they say they're an anti-Shinra group, but in reality…	おもてむきは、反神羅がどうしたとかって声明がでてるらしいがよ。真相はな……
しんそう	真相	n	truth, real situation	On the surface they say they're an anti-Shinra group, but in reality…	おもてむきは、反神羅がどうしたとかって声明がでてるらしいがよ。真相はな……
さべつ	差別	n, vs	distinction, differentiation, discrimination,discrimination (against women, minorities, etc.)	they say they're just out to kill as many people as they can.	無差別大量殺人が目的だってうわささ
たいりょう	大量	adj-na, n, adj-no	large quantity, massive (quantity), mass (e.g. mass production, mass transit, mass destruction)	they say they're just out to kill as many people as they can.	無差別大量殺人が目的だってうわささ
さつじん	殺人	n	murder, homicide, manslaughter	they say they're just out to kill as many people as they can.	無差別大量殺人が目的だってうわささ
もくてき	目的	n	purpose, goal, aim, objective, intention	they say they're just out to kill as many people as they can.	無差別大量殺人が目的だってうわささ
とくべつ	特別	adj-na, adj-no, adv, n	special, particular, extraordinary, exceptional, especial	Since today's special, I'm gonna let you in on a juicy bit of news. But you gotta keep it to yourself.	まあ、今日は特別だ。ここだけの話。いいニュースがあったからな
わらわせる	笑わせる	v1, vt	to make laugh, to set to laughing	That's a good one, ain't it!? While they're bustin' things up on top, the only ones makin' out good are us weapon stores!	笑わせてくれるじゃねぇか！？上でゴタゴタやってくれりゃよ。武器屋としては大助かりってやつよ
ゴタゴタ		n, adv, adv-to, vs	trouble, difficulties, dispute, quarrel, discord, dissension,confusion, disorder, mess, muddle	That's a good one, ain't it!? While they're bustin' things up on top, the only ones makin' out good are us weapon stores!	笑わせてくれるじゃねぇか！？上でゴタゴタやってくれりゃよ。武器屋としては大助かりってやつよ
たすかる	助かる	v5r, vi	to be saved, to be rescued, to survive,to escape harm, to be spared damage,to be helped, to be saved trouble	That's a good one, ain't it!? While they're bustin' things up on top, the only ones makin' out good are us weapon stores!	笑わせてくれるじゃねぇか！？上でゴタゴタやってくれりゃよ。武器屋としては大助かりってやつよ
ざいこ	在庫	n	inventory, stock, stockpile	Now, if we can just get rid of this back stock, we'll be doin' OK.	この在庫の山もはけちまえばいいがな
やま	山	n-pref	mountain, hill,mine (e.g. coal mine),heap, pile,crown (of a hat), thread (of a screw), tread (of a tire), protruding part of an object,climax, peak, critical point,guess, speculation,criminal case, crime,mountain climbing, mountaineering,festival float (esp. one mounted with a decorative halberd),wall, wall tile,temple, temple grounds,wild	Now, if we can just get rid of this back stock, we'll be doin' OK.	この在庫の山もはけちまえばいいがな
はける	捌ける	v1	to flow smoothly,to sell well, to sell out,to exit the stage, to remove (a prop) from the stage	Now, if we can just get rid of this back stock, we'll be doin' OK.	この在庫の山もはけちまえばいいがな
ちる	散る	v5r, vi	to fall (e.g. blossoms, leaves),to scatter, to be dispersed,to disappear, to dissolve, to break up,to spread, to run, to blur,to die a noble death	I welcome everything going to pot!	俺っちは、ぶっそうな世の中を歓迎するぜ！
ぶっそう	物騒	adj-na, n	dangerous, unsettled, troubled, disturbed, insecure	I welcome everything going to pot!	俺っちは、ぶっそうな世の中を歓迎するぜ！
よのなか	世の中	exp, n	society, the world, the times	I welcome everything going to pot!	俺っちは、ぶっそうな世の中を歓迎するぜ！
かんげい	歓迎	n, vs, adj-no	welcome, reception	I welcome everything going to pot!	俺っちは、ぶっそうな世の中を歓迎するぜ！
ゴー		n	go (somewhere), go (signal)	GO!! GO!! AVALANCHE!! That's what I say!	ゴー！！ゴー！！アバランチ！！ってやつだな
おなじみ	お馴染み	adj-no, n	familiar, well-known, regular (e.g. customer), old stand-by	This is the Beginner's Hall.	まいどおなじみ初心者の館だよ～ん！
なめる	舐める	v1, vt	to lick,to taste,to experience (esp. a hardship),to make fun of, to make light of, to put down, to treat with contempt, to underestimate	Don't mess with me. I used to be in SOLDIER. I'll tell you how much I know… an' for free too!	元ソルジャーをなめるな。どれだけ物知りか、教えてやる。しかも、無料でだ！
どれ	何れ	int	which (of three or more),whichever, any,well, now, let me see	Don't mess with me. I used to be in SOLDIER. I'll tell you how much I know… an' for free too!	元ソルジャーをなめるな。どれだけ物知りか、教えてやる。しかも、無料でだ！
ものしり	物知り	n	well-informed person, walking dictionary, extensive knowledge	Don't mess with me. I used to be in SOLDIER. I'll tell you how much I know… an' for free too!	元ソルジャーをなめるな。どれだけ物知りか、教えてやる。しかも、無料でだ！
むりょう	無料	adj-no, n	free (of charge), gratuitous	Don't mess with me. I used to be in SOLDIER. I'll tell you how much I know… an' for free too!	元ソルジャーをなめるな。どれだけ物知りか、教えてやる。しかも、無料でだ！
きろく	記録	vs	record, minutes, document,record (e.g. in sports), results, score,to record, to document,to set a record (e.g. in sports), to show a result, to reach a value	How to save?	記録を残すには？
のこす	残す	v5s, vt	to leave (behind, over), to bequeath, to save, to reserve	How to save?	記録を残すには？
きずつく	傷つく	v5k, vi	to be wounded, to get injured,to get hurt feelings,to get damaged, to get chipped, to get scratched	How to heal your allies?	傷ついた味方を回復するには？
みかた	味方	n, vs	friend, ally, supporter,taking sides with, supporting, standing by, backing up	How to heal your allies?	傷ついた味方を回復するには？
かいふく	回復	n, vs	restoration, rehabilitation, recovery, return, replevin, improvement,recovery (from an illness), recuperation, convalescence	How to heal your allies?	傷ついた味方を回復するには？
まほう	魔法	n	magic, witchcraft, sorcery	Curative Magic?	魔法を使った回復
ぼうぐ	防具	n	guard, protector, defensive armament, personal armor (armour)	Weapons and armor?	武器、防具の使い方
そうちゃく	装着	n, vs	equipping, installing, fitting, mounting, putting on	How to apply Materia?	マテリアの装着
こうど	高度	adj-na, adj-no	altitude, height, elevation,high-degree, high-grade, advanced, sophisticated, strong	Effective ways to use Materia?	マテリアの高度な使い方
せんとう	戦闘	n, vs, adj-no	battle, fight, combat	How to form your battle party?	戦闘時の隊形について
たいけい	隊形	n	battle formation, disposition of troops	How to form your battle party?	戦闘時の隊形について
げんざい	現在	n-adv, n-t	now, current, present, present time, as of	How to check your status?	現在の自分の状態をチェック
リミット		n	limit	About Limit status?	リミット技の使い方
わざ	技	n	technique, art, skill	About Limit status?	リミット技の使い方
そのほか	その他	n-adv, conj	etc., otherwise, besides, in addition, the rest, the others, and so forth	Other things to watch for?	その他の注意
ちゅうい	注意	n, vs	caution, being careful, attention (heed), warning, advice	Other things to watch for?	その他の注意
さしあげる	差し上げる	v1, vt	to give, to offer,to lift up, to hold up, to raise	You're a stingy one. Here, I'll give you ONE Potion.	せこいなあ、元ソルジャーさん。そらポーションの一個くらい、さしあげますぜ
てもち	手持ち	adj-f	in hand, on hand, on one, in stock, in store,handheld	I don't have any extra Potions on me. Why don't you go buy some?	俺もポーションの手持ちがないよ。買ってきたらどうだい？
だい	台	n	stand, rack, table, bench, podium, pedestal, platform, stage,support, holder, rack,counter for machines, incl. vehicles,setting (e.g. in jewellery),level (e.g. price level), range (e.g. after physical units), period (of time, e.g. a decade of one's life),elevated area,viewing platform,dish tray,meal,tall building, tower	I don't have any extra Potions on me. Why don't you go buy some?	俺もポーションの手持ちがないよ。買ってきたらどうだい？
じょうしき	常識	n	common sense, good sense, common knowledge, general knowledge, common practice, accepted practice, social etiquette	You probably know all this. But just in case, I'll go over it.	常識なのでわかっているとは思うが念のため、言っておく
ねん	念	n	sense, idea, thought, feeling,desire, concern,attention, care	You probably know all this. But just in case, I'll go over it.	常識なのでわかっているとは思うが念のため、言っておく
ディスク		n	disk	Until you get instructions, don't open or take discs out of the CD drive.	指示があるまで、ディスクホルダーを開けたり他のものと取りかえたりするな
ホルダー		n	holder	Until you get instructions, don't open or take discs out of the CD drive.	指示があるまで、ディスクホルダーを開けたり他のものと取りかえたりするな
ほか	他	n-adv	other (place, thing, person), the rest,outside, beyond,nothing except, nothing but, nothing apart from, nothing aside from, no choice (but to),besides..., in addition to...	Until you get instructions, don't open or take discs out of the CD drive.	指示があるまで、ディスクホルダーを開けたり他のものと取りかえたりするな
とりかえる	取り替える	v1, vt	to exchange, to replace	Until you get instructions, don't open or take discs out of the CD drive.	指示があるまで、ディスクホルダーを開けたり他のものと取りかえたりするな
ばあい	場合	n-adv, n	case, situation	After you open up the CD drive, I can't guarantee what'll happen. That's all.	ディスクホルダーを開けた場合後のことは保証できない。以上
ほしょう	保証	n, vs	guarantee, security, assurance, pledge, warranty	After you open up the CD drive, I can't guarantee what'll happen. That's all.	ディスクホルダーを開けた場合後のことは保証できない。以上
いじょう	以上	n-adv, n-t	not less than, ... and more, ... and upwards,beyond ... (e.g. one's means), further (e.g. nothing further to say), more than ... (e.g. cannot pay more than that),above-mentioned, foregoing,since ..., seeing that ...,this is all, that is the end, the end	After you open up the CD drive, I can't guarantee what'll happen. That's all.	ディスクホルダーを開けた場合後のことは保証できない。以上
いじる	弄る	v5r, vt	to finger, to touch, to play with, to fiddle with, to toy with,to make changes to, to tinker with, to tamper with,to dabble in, to do as a hobby, to play around with,to grope, to feel around (in one's pocket, bag, etc.)	You cannot take on any more Materia.	これいじょうマテリアは持てません。
すてる	捨てる	v1, vt	to throw away, to cast away, to dump, to discard,to abandon, to desert, to leave,to give up, to resign	Please discard some Materia.	なにかマテリアをすててください。
ぜんたい	全体	n-adv, n-t	whole, entirety, whatever (is the matter)	Received "All" Materia!	『ぜんたいか』のマテリアを手にいれた！
エーテル		n	ether	Received "Ether"!	『エーテル』を手にいれた！
さっそく	早速	adv	at once, immediately, without delay, promptly	Hey!! You got one right off!	おっ！！さっそく手にいれましたね！
こ	子	n-suf	child,young (animal),young woman, young geisha,offshoot,interest,new shares,player who is not a dealer (in cards, mahjong, etc.),bird egg,-er (often of young women)	That was Materia. Next, take this [treasure chest]!	いまのはマテリアですよ。こんどはこの【たからばこ】をどうぞ！
とく	得	adj-na, n	profit, advantage, benefit, gain,rebirth in paradise, entering nirvana	Now listen, hidden in these treasure chests are a lot of items.	いいですか？こ～んな【たからばこ】にはお得なアイテムがかくされてます
アイテム		n	item,something that one "just has to have"	Now listen, hidden in these treasure chests are a lot of items.	いいですか？こ～んな【たからばこ】にはお得なアイテムがかくされてます
かくす	隠す	v5s, vt	to hide, to conceal	Now listen, hidden in these treasure chests are a lot of items.	いいですか？こ～んな【たからばこ】にはお得なアイテムがかくされてます
ボトル		n	bottle	There are box types and bag types, so make sure you don't overlook any.	ボトルタイプやふくろタイプなどほかにもしゅるいがありますからお見のがしないように
ふく	服	suf, ctr	clothes (esp. Western clothes),counter for doses of medicine, gulps of tea, drags of a cigarette, etc.	There are box types and bag types, so make sure you don't overlook any.	ボトルタイプやふくろタイプなどほかにもしゅるいがありますからお見のがしないように
うっとり		adv, adv-to, vs	ecstatically, spellbound, with rapt attention,abstractedly, absentmindedly, absorbedly, vacantly	This is the fabled [Save Point]!!	うっとり……くるくる……これがうわさの【セーブポイント】！！
くるくる		adv, adv-to, vs	whirling, revolving, spinning, going round and round,coiling around, winding around, rolling around,working tirelessly, working hard,constantly changing	This is the fabled [Save Point]!!	うっとり……くるくる……これがうわさの【セーブポイント】！！
テント		n	tent	At a [Save Point] you can use a [tent] and/or select 'SAVE'.	【セーブポイント】では……『テント』を使って休むことセーブ　することができちゃいます
ぜんめつ	全滅	n, vs	annihilation, total destruction, complete destruction, crushing defeat	Even if you are wiped out, if you've saved, you can restart from that same point. That way you don't have to worry when you've been wiped out.	も～し、全滅しても、　セーブ　しておけばその場所から復活することができちゃうの。これなら、安心して全滅できるわよね
ふっかつ	復活	n, vs, adj-no	revival (e.g. musical), come-back,restoration, rebirth, resurrection	Even if you are wiped out, if you've saved, you can restart from that same point. That way you don't have to worry when you've been wiped out.	も～し、全滅しても、　セーブ　しておけばその場所から復活することができちゃうの。これなら、安心して全滅できるわよね
ちょ	著	adj-na, n	work, book,(a book) by,obvious, striking	This is jumping ahead a little but, when you leave Midgar…	ちょ～っと、先の話になるけどミッドガルを出ることになったら……
わ	和	n, n-pref, adj-no	sum,harmony, peace,Japan, Japanese-style	and you get to the world map, you can save anywhere you like. Remember that.	地和線まで広がる【ワールドマップ】で好きなだけ　セーブ　することができるの。そのときがきたら、思い出してね
ひろがる	広がる	v5r, vi	to spread (out), to extend, to stretch, to reach to, to get around, to fill (e.g. a space)	and you get to the world map, you can save anywhere you like. Remember that.	地和線まで広がる【ワールドマップ】で好きなだけ　セーブ　することができるの。そのときがきたら、思い出してね
ワールド		n	world	and you get to the world map, you can save anywhere you like. Remember that.	地和線まで広がる【ワールドマップ】で好きなだけ　セーブ　することができるの。そのときがきたら、思い出してね
しょうかい	照会	n, vs, adj-no	inquiry, enquiry, query, reference	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
あずかる	預かる	v5r, vt	to look after, to take care of, to keep, to hold on to, to keep in custody,to be put in charge of, to be given responsibility for, to be entrusted with,to withhold (an announcement), to reserve (judgment), to leave undecided,to take upon oneself (to do), to settle (a matter) oneself	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
あっし	圧死	n, vs	crushing to death	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
たびさき	旅先	n	destination, goal (of travel), place one stays during a journey	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
いきさき	行き先	n	destination,whereabouts,future, prospects	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
さきざき	先々	n-adv, n-t	distant future, inevitable future,places one goes to	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
おめにかかる	お目にかかる	exp, v5r	to meet (someone of higher status),to be recognized (esp. by someone of higher status), to be visible, to be seen, to be noticed	That should be all you need to know about the Save Point. I'll probably see you again somewhere down the road. Take care!	ただいま、ごしょうかいにあずかりましたあっしが【セーブポイント】でござんす！旅先行き先先々でお目にかかることと思いますが今後ともよろしゅうおねがいもうしあげます！
バトル		n	battle	Hey SOLDIER!! Tell us about battles! We'll even pay you!	物知り元ソルジャーさん！！バトルのことをオレたち３人組に教えてくださいよ！報酬はずみますから！
はずむ	弾む	v5m, vi	to spring, to bound, to bounce,to be stimulated, to be encouraged, to get lively,to treat oneself to, to splurge on,to breathe hard, to pant, to be out of breath	Hey SOLDIER!! Tell us about battles! We'll even pay you!	物知り元ソルジャーさん！！バトルのことをオレたち３人組に教えてくださいよ！報酬はずみますから！
とびだす	飛び出す	v5s, vi	to jump out, to rush out, to fly out,to appear (suddenly),to protrude, to project,to butt in	About numbers on the screen	【飛び出す数字】について
すうじ	数字	n	numeral, figure, digit, numeric character	About numbers on the screen	【飛び出す数字】について
チェンジ		n, vs	change	About [Change] and [Defend]	【チェンジ】と【ぼうぎょ】について
ぼうぎょ	防御	n, vs, adj-no	defense, defence, safeguard, protection	About [Change] and [Defend]	【チェンジ】と【ぼうぎょ】について
ゲージ		n	gauge	About [Gauges]	【ゲージ】について
ステータス		n	status	About [Status]	【ステータス】について
ぞくせい	属性	n	attribute, property, context, element	About [Elementals]	【属性】について
ヘルプ		n	help	About [Help]	【ヘルプ】について
おちぶれる	落ちぶれる	v1, vi	to be ruined (reduced to poverty), to fall low, to go under, to come to ruin	I'm not hard up enough to take money from guys like you. But I'll rap with you for a while.	おまえたちから金をとるほど落ちぶれちゃいない。ひまつぶしにつきあってやる
つきあう	付き合う	v5u, vi	to associate with, to keep company with, to go out with, to go steady with, to get on with,to go along with, to follow someone's lead, to accompany someone, to compromise	I'm not hard up enough to take money from guys like you. But I'll rap with you for a while.	おまえたちから金をとるほど落ちぶれちゃいない。ひまつぶしにつきあってやる
つねに	常に	adv	always, constantly	ATB or Active Time Battle is a system that is always in operation during battle.	【ＡＴＢ】、すなわち【アクティブタイムバトル】は戦闘中、つねに時間が流れているシステムだ
システム		n, adj-no	system	ATB or Active Time Battle is a system that is always in operation during battle.	【ＡＴＢ】、すなわち【アクティブタイムバトル】は戦闘中、つねに時間が流れているシステムだ
コマンド		n	(computer) command,command key,commando	This gives you time to pick out your commands. This is especially helpful to beginners.	コマンドをゆっくり選べるというわけだ。おまえたち、初心者にはおあつらえむきだな
ゆっくり		adv, n, vs, adv-to	slowly, at ease, restful	This gives you time to pick out your commands. This is especially helpful to beginners.	コマンドをゆっくり選べるというわけだ。おまえたち、初心者にはおあつらえむきだな
あつらえる	誂える	v1, vt	to give an order, to place an order, to have made to order	This gives you time to pick out your commands. This is especially helpful to beginners.	コマンドをゆっくり選べるというわけだ。おまえたち、初心者にはおあつらえむきだな
おなじく	同じく	adv, conj, vs	similarly, same (idea), same (name)	Selecting [Recommended] ATB in the config menu can stop time while the effects of spells and items are taking place during battle.	同じくコンフィグでＡＴＢを【おすすめ】にすると……戦闘中、魔法やアイテムのエフェクトが出ている間時間が止まる
おすすめ	お勧め	n, vs, adj-no	recommendation, advice, suggestion, encouragement	Selecting [Recommended] ATB in the config menu can stop time while the effects of spells and items are taking place during battle.	同じくコンフィグでＡＴＢを【おすすめ】にすると……戦闘中、魔法やアイテムのエフェクトが出ている間時間が止まる
エフェクト		n	effect	Selecting [Recommended] ATB in the config menu can stop time while the effects of spells and items are taking place during battle.	同じくコンフィグでＡＴＢを【おすすめ】にすると……戦闘中、魔法やアイテムのエフェクトが出ている間時間が止まる
ようす	様子	n	state, state of affairs, situation, circumstances,appearance, look, aspect,sign, indication	This lets you take your time looking over the progression of the battle. When you don't want to rush in battle, this is for you!	戦闘の様子をゆっくり見られるというわけだ。落ちついて戦いたいときはこれだな
アクティブ		adj-na	active	Personally, I always use [Active], but you can use whichever you like.	俺はいつでも【アクティブ】だが気にするな、好きなものを選ぶといい。以上だ
しろ	白	n	white,innocence, innocent person,blank space,white go stone,white dragon tile,skewered grilled pig intestine	White numbers appearing on the screen in battle are damage points. Green numbers show restorative points.	バトルの時に、【ピロンと飛び出す数字】は白がダメージ、緑が回復していることを表している
ダメージ		n	damage	White numbers appearing on the screen in battle are damage points. Green numbers show restorative points.	バトルの時に、【ピロンと飛び出す数字】は白がダメージ、緑が回復していることを表している
みどり	緑	n	green,greenery (esp. fresh verdure)	White numbers appearing on the screen in battle are damage points. Green numbers show restorative points.	バトルの時に、【ピロンと飛び出す数字】は白がダメージ、緑が回復していることを表している
あらわす	表す	v5s, vt	to represent, to signify, to stand for,to reveal, to show, to display,to express,to make widely known	White numbers appearing on the screen in battle are damage points. Green numbers show restorative points.	バトルの時に、【ピロンと飛び出す数字】は白がダメージ、緑が回復していることを表している
ぜんれつ	前列	n	front row	The [Change] command can move characters to and from the front and back rows.	【チェンジ】のコマンドで戦闘隊形の前列・後列を入れかえられる
こうれつ	後列	n	rear, back row	The [Change] command can move characters to and from the front and back rows.	【チェンジ】のコマンドで戦闘隊形の前列・後列を入れかえられる
いれかえる	入れ替える	v1, vt	to replace, to substitute, to shift, to change places	The [Change] command can move characters to and from the front and back rows.	【チェンジ】のコマンドで戦闘隊形の前列・後列を入れかえられる
へる	減る	v5r, vi	to decrease (in size or number), to diminish, to abate	In the back row, the damage received is less, but the attacking power is less.	後列にすると受けるダメージが減るが、攻撃力も減る。【チェンジ】は、戦闘コマンドを選ぶときに【方向キーの左】を押すと可能だ
こうげき	攻撃	n, vs	attack, strike, offensive,criticism, censure, denunciation, condemnation	In the back row, the damage received is less, but the attacking power is less.	後列にすると受けるダメージが減るが、攻撃力も減る。【チェンジ】は、戦闘コマンドを選ぶときに【方向キーの左】を押すと可能だ
ひだり	左	n, adj-no	left, left hand side	In the back row, the damage received is less, but the attacking power is less.	後列にすると受けるダメージが減るが、攻撃力も減る。【チェンジ】は、戦闘コマンドを選ぶときに【方向キーの左】を押すと可能だ
かのう	可能	adj-na, n	possible, potential, practicable, feasible	In the back row, the damage received is less, but the attacking power is less.	後列にすると受けるダメージが減るが、攻撃力も減る。【チェンジ】は、戦闘コマンドを選ぶときに【方向キーの左】を押すと可能だ
みぎ	右	n	right, right hand side,afore-mentioned (esp. in vertical Japanese writing), foregoing, forgoing, above	You can make a [Change] by pressing the Directional button in battle. Pushing the Directional button the other direction during battle accesses [Defend].	同じく戦闘コマンドを選ぶときに【方向キーの右】を押すと【ぼうぎょ】だ
はんぶん	半分	n-adv, n	half	Selecting [Defend] reduces the damage you receive by half until the next command.	【ぼうぎょ】のコマンドを選ぶと次のコマンド入力までのあいだダメージを半分にすることができる
むろん	無論	adv	of course, certainly, naturally	If you're up against a strong enemy, don't hesitate to use this one. Of course, I never need it.	手強い相手には無理せず【ぼうぎょ】することが必要だ。むろん、俺には関係ないことだがな
っぱなし	っ放し	suf	keep ...-ing, have been ...-ing, leaving (something) on, leaving (something) still in use	Push [PAGEUP] and [PAGEDOWN] together, hold them down, and you can escape.	Ｌ１ボタンとＲ１ボタンを押しっぱなしにしていると逃げられたはずだ
かくにん	確認	n, vs	confirmation, verification, validation, review, check, affirmation, identification	During battle, there are several [Gauges] displayed. You can't check them now, so just remember what I tell you.	いまは確認できないからわかりにくいかもしれんがとにかく、聞いておけ。戦闘中、いくつか表示されている【ゲージ】のことだ
ひょうじ	表示	n, vs	indication, expression, showing, manifestation, demonstration,display, displaying,representation	During battle, there are several [Gauges] displayed. You can't check them now, so just remember what I tell you.	いまは確認できないからわかりにくいかもしれんがとにかく、聞いておけ。戦闘中、いくつか表示されている【ゲージ】のことだ
めぐる	巡る	v5r, vi	to go around,to return,to surround,to concern (usu. of disputes)	[time gauge] displays the time remaining until your next turn while in battle.	【ＴＩＭＥゲージ】は戦闘中、次のコマンド入力が回ってくるまでの待ち時間をあらわしている
まちじかん	待ち時間	n	waiting time, latency, standby time (e.g. cellular phones), queueing time	[time gauge] displays the time remaining until your next turn while in battle.	【ＴＩＭＥゲージ】は戦闘中、次のコマンド入力が回ってくるまでの待ち時間をあらわしている
まわす	回す	v5s, vt	to turn, to rotate, to spin, to twist, to gyrate, to turn on (something that turns),to pass around, to send around, to hand around, to circulate,to move (someone or something to where its needed), to send, to bring, to transfer, to forward, to direct, to submit,to turn (to a new use), to use (for something else),to put (someone in a position), to make (e.g. an enemy of),to ... around (e.g. chase, fool, play), to do all over, to do everywhere, to do completely,to surround (something) with, to enclose with,to put (an arm) around (e.g. someone's waist), to reach around,to invest (money), to lend,to dial (a telephone number),to gang-rape	When the gauge is full, you can make your command. If you don't want to make one, push [MENU] and you can move to the next character. It's convenient when you wanna make BARRET work.	ゲージがいっぱいになるとコマンドの入力が可能だがもし入力したくなければ、【△ボタン】で次のやつに順番をまわすこともできる。BARRETをこきつかいたい時などに便利だ
こきつかう	こき使う	v5u, vt	to work (someone) hard, to push (someone) around	When the gauge is full, you can make your command. If you don't want to make one, push [MENU] and you can move to the next character. It's convenient when you wanna make BARRET work.	ゲージがいっぱいになるとコマンドの入力が可能だがもし入力したくなければ、【△ボタン】で次のやつに順番をまわすこともできる。BARRETをこきつかいたい時などに便利だ
べんり	便利	adj-na	convenient, handy, useful	When the gauge is full, you can make your command. If you don't want to make one, push [MENU] and you can move to the next character. It's convenient when you wanna make BARRET work.	ゲージがいっぱいになるとコマンドの入力が可能だがもし入力したくなければ、【△ボタン】で次のやつに順番をまわすこともできる。BARRETをこきつかいたい時などに便利だ
つかえる	使える	v1	to be usable, to be serviceable, to be useful	The [limit gauge] increases every time you sustain damage. When it is full, you can use the [limit technique].	【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】はダメージを受けるごとにのびていくはずだ。これがいっぱいになると、【リミット技】が使える
クリア		n, vs	clear,clearing (a bar, hurdle, etc.),overcoming, getting through, getting past, completing, solving, settling, meeting (e.g. a standard),clearing (the ball),clearing (e.g. a checked box)	This gauge is not cleared after each battle, but gradually builds up over time.	【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】は、各戦闘ごとにクリアされず数をこなしただけ、たまっていくタイプだ
かず	数	n	number, amount	This gauge is not cleared after each battle, but gradually builds up over time.	【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】は、各戦闘ごとにクリアされず数をこなしただけ、たまっていくタイプだ
こなす	熟す	suf, v5s	to digest,to break down, to break to pieces, to crush,to be able to use, to be good at, to have a good command of,to finish, to complete, to manage, to perform,to sell,to do ... well, to do ... completely	This gauge is not cleared after each battle, but gradually builds up over time.	【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】は、各戦闘ごとにクリアされず数をこなしただけ、たまっていくタイプだ
たまる	溜まる	v5r, vi	to collect, to gather, to save, to accumulate, to pile up	This gauge is not cleared after each battle, but gradually builds up over time.	【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】は、各戦闘ごとにクリアされず数をこなしただけ、たまっていくタイプだ
つかい	使い	n-suf, n-pref	errand, mission, going as envoy,messenger, bearer, errand boy, errand girl,familiar spirit,use, usage, user, trainer, tamer, charmer	It takes a while for it to build up, so you have to think about which times are the best to use it.	たまったからといって、すぐにつかわず【リミット技】の使いどころを見極めることが大切なのは言うまでもない
みきわめる	見極める	v1, vt	to ascertain, to make sure of, to determine, to probe, to get to the bottom (of something)	It takes a while for it to build up, so you have to think about which times are the best to use it.	たまったからといって、すぐにつかわず【リミット技】の使いどころを見極めることが大切なのは言うまでもない
いかり	怒り	n	anger, rage, fury, wrath, indignation	You probably don't know about them, but there are conditions of [fury] and [sadness].	おまえたちは知らないだろうから、教えといてやる。【ステータス】に、【怒り】と【悲しい】という状態がある
めいちゅう	命中	n, vs	(direct) hit, hitting the mark	When you have [fury], your limit gauge builds up sooner, but your attacking accuracy is lower.	【怒り】は、【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】の上がり方が早くなるが攻撃の命中率は低下する
りつ	率	n, n-suf	rate, ratio, proportion, percentage	When you have [fury], your limit gauge builds up sooner, but your attacking accuracy is lower.	【怒り】は、【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】の上がり方が早くなるが攻撃の命中率は低下する
ていか	低下	n, vs	fall, decline, lowering, deterioration, degradation	When you have [fury], your limit gauge builds up sooner, but your attacking accuracy is lower.	【怒り】は、【ＬＩＭＩＴゲージ】の上がり方が早くなるが攻撃の命中率は低下する
とくてい	特定	n, vs	specific, particular, designated, special,specifying, designating, identifying, pinpointing	The [barrier gauge] shows your defense barriers.	【ＢＡＲＲＩＥＲゲージ】は特定の魔法の効果時間をあらわす
こうか	効果	n	effect, effectiveness, efficacy, result,effects (e.g. sound effects, visual effects, special effects)	The [barrier gauge] shows your defense barriers.	【ＢＡＲＲＩＥＲゲージ】は特定の魔法の効果時間をあらわす
なぐる	殴る	v5r, vt	to strike, to hit, to beat, to punch	The top gauge displays [barrier] or magic defense against attacks. The bottom gauge displays [magic barrier] or defenses against magic attacks.	上のゲージは、なぐられ攻撃を防ぐ魔法【バリア】下のゲージは、魔法攻撃を防ぐ魔法【マバリア】
ふせぐ	防ぐ	v5g, vt	to defend against, to protect against,to prevent, to avert, to avoid	The top gauge displays [barrier] or magic defense against attacks. The bottom gauge displays [magic barrier] or defenses against magic attacks.	上のゲージは、なぐられ攻撃を防ぐ魔法【バリア】下のゲージは、魔法攻撃を防ぐ魔法【マバリア】
りょうほう	両方	n, adj-no	both, both sides, both parties	Both will cut the damage you receive in half. However, over time they will disappear.	両方ともダメージを半分にしてくれるが時間が経つと消えてしまう
たつ	経つ	v5t, vi	to pass (of time), to elapse	Both will cut the damage you receive in half. However, over time they will disappear.	両方ともダメージを半分にしてくれるが時間が経つと消えてしまう
きえる	消える	v1, vi	to go out, to vanish, to disappear	Both will cut the damage you receive in half. However, over time they will disappear.	両方ともダメージを半分にしてくれるが時間が経つと消えてしまう
ちゅうもく	注目	n, vs	notice, attention, observation	Whenever you use [barrier] or [magic barrier] make sure to pay attention to the [barrier gauge].	【バリア】と【マバリア】の魔法をつかったときは【ＢＡＲＲＩＥＲゲージ】に注目だな
りかい	理解	n, vs	understanding, comprehension, appreciation, sympathy	Looks like you didn't get it the last time I told you. What's wrong with you? You touched in the head?	この俺の説明でもわからんようならしかたない。おまえたちの理解する能力がたりないようだ
のうりょく	能力	n	ability, faculty	Looks like you didn't get it the last time I told you. What's wrong with you? You touched in the head?	この俺の説明でもわからんようならしかたない。おまえたちの理解する能力がたりないようだ
たりる	足りる	v1, vi	to be sufficient, to be enough,to be worth doing, to be worthy of, to deserve,to do (the job), to serve, to answer	Looks like you didn't get it the last time I told you. What's wrong with you? You touched in the head?	この俺の説明でもわからんようならしかたない。おまえたちの理解する能力がたりないようだ
セレクト		n, vs	select	Well, don't worry. You just need to push [ASSIST] in battle.	だが、安心しろ。そんなおまえたちは、戦闘中、セレクトボタンを押してみるといいだろう
メッセージ		n	message	Do that, and the [Help] message will walk you through the commands.	【ヘルプメッセージ】が、俺にかわっていろいろとコマンドの説明をしてくれるはずだ
かわる	変わる	v5r, vi	to change, to be transformed, to be altered, to vary,to move to,to be different, to be uncommon, to be unusual	Do that, and the [Help] message will walk you through the commands.	【ヘルプメッセージ】が、俺にかわっていろいろとコマンドの説明をしてくれるはずだ
モンスター		adj-f	monster, monstrosity,giant, influential figure, colossus,monsterlike, over-demanding, bullying, overbearing, bossy	It also shows you the name of your enemy, so even I use it once in a while. Make good use of it.	敵のモンスター名なども表示されるから俺も気分転換に見ることもある。はずかしがらずに使うといい
てんかん	転換	n, vs, adj-no	conversion, diversion, changeover, commutation, switchover	It also shows you the name of your enemy, so even I use it once in a while. Make good use of it.	敵のモンスター名なども表示されるから俺も気分転換に見ることもある。はずかしがらずに使うといい
きおく	記憶	n, vs	memory, recollection, remembrance,storage	[wiped out]. This is one I've never personally used. But I heard from someone what it was about.	【全滅】か……俺の記憶にはないから、これは人から聞いた話だ
じみち	地道	adj-na, n	steady, honest, sober, straightforward	Even a weakling like you can make it out of the roughest places as long as you hang in there and fight. You should be glad!	おまえたちのような弱いヤツでも地道に戦えば、どんな難所でも脱出できるはずだ。ありがたいことだな
なんしょ	難所	n	perilous pass (on a route or journey), rough spot	Even a weakling like you can make it out of the roughest places as long as you hang in there and fight. You should be glad!	おまえたちのような弱いヤツでも地道に戦えば、どんな難所でも脱出できるはずだ。ありがたいことだな
キャラクター		n	character, personality, disposition,character (in a film, novel, comic, etc.),letter, character, symbol	[Status] means just that. The status of each character.	【ステータス】とはキャラクターの状態のことだ
かさなる	重なる	v5r, vi	to be piled up, to lie on top of one another,to come one after another, to happen over and over, to pile up (e.g. stress), to accumulate,to overlap (each other), to occur at the same time, to happen simultaneously	I'll probably wind up repeating myself, but let me go over a few basic points.	これまで説明したことと重なるかもしれんが代表的なものをまとめといてやる
だいひょう	代表	n	representative, representation, delegation, type, example, model,switchboard number, main number	I'll probably wind up repeating myself, but let me go over a few basic points.	これまで説明したことと重なるかもしれんが代表的なものをまとめといてやる
まとめる	纏める	v1, vt	to collect, to put (it all) together, to integrate, to consolidate, to unify,to summarize, to aggregate,to bring to a conclusion, to finalize, to settle, to put in order,to establish, to decide	I'll probably wind up repeating myself, but let me go over a few basic points.	これまで説明したことと重なるかもしれんが代表的なものをまとめといてやる
すう	吸う	v5u, vt	to smoke, to breathe in, to inhale,to suck, to sip, to slurp,to absorb, to soak up,to kiss	Sleep You cannot put in a command until you get up.	すいみん　起きるまでコマンド入力不可になる。
ふか	不可	n	wrong, bad, improper, unjustifiable, inadvisable,not allowed, not possible,failing grade	Sleep You cannot put in a command until you get up.	すいみん　起きるまでコマンド入力不可になる。
エイチピー	ＨＰ	n	horsepower, HP,home page,half-pipe (i.e. in snowboarding),HP (i.e. a 'hit point' in a role-playing game),harp	Poison Steals your HP in battle.	どく　　　　戦闘中にどんどんＨＰが減っていく。
ばい	倍	suf	twice, double,times, -fold	Fury Damage is increased, attack accuracy decreased. Tranquilizers will remedy it.	いかり　　ダメージ倍、命中率低下。鎮静剤でもどる。
ちんせい	鎮静	n, vs, adj-no	calm, quiet, tranquility, tranquillity, appeasement, pacification	Fury Damage is increased, attack accuracy decreased. Tranquilizers will remedy it.	いかり　　ダメージ倍、命中率低下。鎮静剤でもどる。
ざい	剤	n-suf	medicine, agent, (chemical) substance, drug, dose	Fury Damage is increased, attack accuracy decreased. Tranquilizers will remedy it.	いかり　　ダメージ倍、命中率低下。鎮静剤でもどる。
こうふん	興奮	n, vs	excitement, stimulation, agitation, arousal	Sadness Damage is decreased. Hyper will remedy it.	かなしい　ダメージ低下。興奮剤でもどる。
せき	席	n	seat,location (of a gathering, etc.), place,position, post	Petrify Will petrify and become immobilized. Every member will be wiped out.	せきか　　石になり、動けなくなる。全員石で全滅だ。
いし	石	n	stone,gem, jewel	Petrify Will petrify and become immobilized. Every member will be wiped out.	せきか　　石になり、動けなくなる。全員石で全滅だ。
ぜんいん	全員	n-adv, n	all members (unanimity), all hands, the whole crew, everyone, everybody	Petrify Will petrify and become immobilized. Every member will be wiped out.	せきか　　石になり、動けなくなる。全員石で全滅だ。
こん	紺	n, adj-no	navy blue, deep blue	Confuse Will attack enemy and ally alike.	こんらん　頭が混乱し、敵味方の区別がつかなくなる。
くべつ	区別	n, vs	distinction, differentiation, classification	Confuse Will attack enemy and ally alike.	こんらん　頭が混乱し、敵味方の区別がつかなくなる。
ちん	珍	adj-na, n	rare, curious, strange	Silence Will be unable to cast magic.	ちんもく　全ての魔法をとなえられなくなる。
となえる	唱える	v1, vt	to recite, to chant,to cry, to yell, to shout,to advocate, to advance, to preach, to insist	Silence Will be unable to cast magic.	ちんもく　全ての魔法をとなえられなくなる。
タイム		n	time,thyme,time out (e.g. in sport)	Paralyze Stops time gauges, commands.	マヒ　　　　タイムゲージ停止、コマンド入力不可
ていし	停止	n, vs	suspension, interruption, stoppage, ban, standstill, halt, hang-up, deadlock, stalemate, abeyance,suspension of music, dance, etc. as a sign of mourning for a prominent person	Paralyze Stops time gauges, commands.	マヒ　　　　タイムゲージ停止、コマンド入力不可
くら	蔵	n	warehouse, storehouse, cellar, magazine, granary, godown, depository, treasury, elevator	Darkness Accuracy of hitting attacks decreases.	くらやみ　なぐり攻撃の命中率低下。
やみ	闇	n, adj-no	darkness, the dark, dark,bewilderment, despair, hopelessness,black-marketeering, shady, illegal, under-the-table	Darkness Accuracy of hitting attacks decreases.	くらやみ　なぐり攻撃の命中率低下。
かえる	返る	suf, v5r	to return, to come back, to go back,to turn over,to become extremely, to become completely	Frog Become a frog. I hate this one!	カエル　　カエルになる。俺はだいきらいだ。
へんか	変化	n, vs	change, variation, alteration, mutation, transition, transformation, transfiguration, metamorphosis,variety, diversity,inflection, declension, conjugation,sidestepping	Your [Status] can be changed with magic and items, so you should check it whenever you buy things.	【ステータス変化】はアイテムや魔法で直せるから物を買うときに確認しておくのがいいだろう
もの	物	pref	thing, object, article, stuff, substance,one's things, possessions, property, belongings,things, something, anything, everything, nothing,quality,reason, the way of things,used to emphasize emotion, judgment, etc., used to indicate a common occurrence in the past (after a verb in past tense), used to indicate a general tendency, used to indicate something that should happen,item classified as ..., item related to ..., work of ...,cause of ..., cause for ...,somehow, somewhat, for some reason,really, truly	Your [Status] can be changed with magic and items, so you should check it whenever you buy things.	【ステータス変化】はアイテムや魔法で直せるから物を買うときに確認しておくのがいいだろう
ゆうり	有利	adj-na, n	advantageous, favourable, better, stronger,profitable, lucrative, gainful, paying	It's necessary to move ahead effectively. If you pay attention to the types of elementals you use you'll become intermediate in no time.	有利に戦闘を進めるためには不可価だが【属性】を気にして戦えるようになればもう立派な中級者とよべるな
すすめる	進める	v1, vt	to advance, to move forward, to put (a clock, watch) forward,to carry forward (plans, work, etc.), to proceed with, to make progress in, to further, to advance, to hasten, to speed up,to raise, to elevate, to promote, to develop, to stimulate (e.g. one's appetite)	It's necessary to move ahead effectively. If you pay attention to the types of elementals you use you'll become intermediate in no time.	有利に戦闘を進めるためには不可価だが【属性】を気にして戦えるようになればもう立派な中級者とよべるな
あたい	値	n, adj-no	price, cost,value, worth, merit,value	It's necessary to move ahead effectively. If you pay attention to the types of elementals you use you'll become intermediate in no time.	有利に戦闘を進めるためには不可価だが【属性】を気にして戦えるようになればもう立派な中級者とよべるな
りっぱ	立派	adj-na	splendid, fine, handsome, elegant, imposing, prominent,praiseworthy, creditable, worthy,legal, legitimate, lawful,undeniable (e.g. crime), indisputable, solid	It's necessary to move ahead effectively. If you pay attention to the types of elementals you use you'll become intermediate in no time.	有利に戦闘を進めるためには不可価だが【属性】を気にして戦えるようになればもう立派な中級者とよべるな
ちゅうきゅう	中級	n, adj-no	intermediate level	It's necessary to move ahead effectively. If you pay attention to the types of elementals you use you'll become intermediate in no time.	有利に戦闘を進めるためには不可価だが【属性】を気にして戦えるようになればもう立派な中級者とよべるな
あくまでも	飽くまでも	adv	to the last, persistency, thoroughness	I put together this list, but remember, it's just a partial list don't take it too literally.	代表的なものの一例をまとめといてやる。あくまでも一例だ、うのみにするな
うのみ	鵜呑み	n	swallowing without chewing,swallowing (e.g. a story), accepting without questioning	I put together this list, but remember, it's just a partial list don't take it too literally.	代表的なものの一例をまとめといてやる。あくまでも一例だ、うのみにするな
ほのお	炎	n	flame, blaze,flames (of intense emotion, e.g. love, jealousy, anger), passion	Fire Fire effect. Works best on animals and water monsters.	炎　　火の効果。けもの、氷のモンスターにきく。
こおり	氷	n	ice,shaved ice (usually served with flavored simple syrup)	Fire Fire effect. Works best on animals and water monsters.	炎　　火の効果。けもの、氷のモンスターにきく。
れい	冷	n	cold, cool,cold sake	Ice Ice effect. Works best on fire monsters and things that hate the cold.	冷　　氷の効果。寒がり、火のモンスターにきく。
かみなり	雷	n	lightning, thunder, thunderbolt,god of thunder, god of lightning,anger, fit of anger	Lightning Lightning effect. Works best on mechanical things.	雷　　電撃の効果。機械でできたヤツにきく。
でんげき	電撃	adj-f	electric shock,blitz, lightning attack,sudden and without warning, shocking	Lightning Lightning effect. Works best on mechanical things.	雷　　電撃の効果。機械でできたヤツにきく。
つち	土	n	earth, soil, dirt, clay, mud,the earth (historically, esp. as opposed to the heavens), the ground, the land,low-quality torinoko-gami (containing mud),(period of) refraining from construction in the direction of the god of the earth (in Onmyōdō)	Earth Attacks using the earth's power. Doesn't work on flying enemies.	土　　大地の力の攻撃。飛んでるヤツにはきかない。
だいち	大地	n	ground, earth, the solid earth, the (vast) land	Earth Attacks using the earth's power. Doesn't work on flying enemies.	土　　大地の力の攻撃。飛んでるヤツにはきかない。
とぶ	飛ぶ	v5b, vi	to fly, to soar,to jump, to leap, to spring, to bound, to hop	Earth Attacks using the earth's power. Doesn't work on flying enemies.	土　　大地の力の攻撃。飛んでるヤツにはきかない。
どく	毒	n	poison, toxicant,harm, evil influence,ill will, spite, malice,abusive language	Poison Poisons enemies. Doesn't work on any poison-based enemies.	毒　　毒状態にする。もともと毒のヤツにはきかない。
もともと	元々	adv, adj-no	originally, by nature, from the start	Poison Poisons enemies. Doesn't work on any poison-based enemies.	毒　　毒状態にする。もともと毒のヤツにはきかない。
おも	主	adj-na, n	chief, main, principal, important,main secondary or supporting role (in kyogen)	Gravity Gravity-based attack. These hurt if they hit.	重　　重力を使った攻撃。当たるといたいな。
じゅうりょく	重力	n	gravity, gravitation, gravitational pull	Gravity Gravity-based attack. These hurt if they hit.	重　　重力を使った攻撃。当たるといたいな。
あたる	当たる	v5r, vt	to be hit, to strike,to touch, to be in contact, to be affixed,to be equivalent to, to be applicable, to apply to,to be right on the money (of a prediction, criticism, etc.),to be selected (in a lottery, etc.), to win,to be successful, to go well, to be a hit,to face, to confront,to lie (in the direction of),to undertake, to be assigned,to be stricken (by food poisoning, heat, etc.), to be afflicted,to be called on (e.g. by a teacher),to treat (esp. harshly), to lash out at,to be unnecessary,to be hitting well, to be on a hitting streak,(in fishing) to feel a bite,(of fruit, etc.) to be bruised, to spoil,to feel (something) out, to probe into, to check (i.e. by comparison),to shave,to be a relative of a person, to stand in a relationship	Gravity Gravity-based attack. These hurt if they hit.	重　　重力を使った攻撃。当たるといたいな。
みず	水	n	water (esp. cool, fresh water, e.g. drinking water),fluid (esp. in an animal tissue), liquid,flood, floodwaters,water offered to wrestlers just prior to a bout,break granted to wrestlers engaged in a prolonged bout	Water Calls on the earth's water. Works well on fire monsters.	水　　大地の恵みの水を呼ぶ。火のモンスターにきく。
めぐみ	恵み	n	blessing, grace	Water Calls on the earth's water. Works well on fire monsters.	水　　大地の恵みの水を呼ぶ。火のモンスターにきく。
ふり	振り	n	swing, shake, wave, swinging,appearance, behaviour,pretence (pretense), show, pretending (to),going to restaurant, hotel etc. without a reservation or introduction,move (dance), postures,lead in (e.g. to a running joke, asking a question), lead up,unsewn part of a hanging sleeve on a traditional Japanese woman's garment,counter for swords, blades, etc.,not wearing underwear or pants	Wind Calls up the winds. Works well on flying enemies.	風　　大気の風をよびおこす。飛んでるヤツにきく。
たいき	大気	n	atmosphere	Wind Calls up the winds. Works well on flying enemies.	風　　大気の風をよびおこす。飛んでるヤツにきく。
よびおこす	呼び起こす	v5s, vt	to wake (someone) up (by calling for them), to awaken,to call (to mind), to bring back (memories), to evoke, to arouse (e.g. interest)	Wind Calls up the winds. Works well on flying enemies.	風　　大気の風をよびおこす。飛んでるヤツにきく。
せい	聖	n, adj-na	Saint, St., S.,sacred, holy, pure	Holy Calls up the Planet's power. Works well on dark monsters.	聖　　星の力をよびおこす。暗黒のモンスターにきく。
あんこく	暗黒	adj-na, n, adj-no	darkness	Holy Calls up the Planet's power. Works well on dark monsters.	聖　　星の力をよびおこす。暗黒のモンスターにきく。
そうはん	相反	n, vs	inversion, opposition, conflicting, repulsion, contradiction	If you use reciprocal elementals in your attacks, the effect is huge!	相反する【属性】を攻撃に使用することで大きな効果を得られる
しよう	使用	n, vs	use, application, employment, utilization, utilisation	If you use reciprocal elementals in your attacks, the effect is huge!	相反する【属性】を攻撃に使用することで大きな効果を得られる
える	得る	aux-v, v1, vt	to get, to earn, to acquire, to procure, to gain, to secure, to attain, to obtain, to win,to understand, to comprehend,to receive something undesirable (e.g. a punishment), to get (ill),to be able to ..., can ...	If you use reciprocal elementals in your attacks, the effect is huge!	相反する【属性】を攻撃に使用することで大きな効果を得られる
こうりつ	効率	n	efficiency	Also, if you use the same elemental, your defenses are raised. But, you have to be careful because the opposite is also true.	また、同じ属性なら防御の効率があがる。だが……逆もまた真なり。気をつけることだな
ぎゃく	逆	n-pref	reverse, opposite,converse (of a hypothesis, etc.),inverse (function)	Also, if you use the same elemental, your defenses are raised. But, you have to be careful because the opposite is also true.	また、同じ属性なら防御の効率があがる。だが……逆もまた真なり。気をつけることだな
しん	真	n	truth, reality, genuineness,seriousness,logical TRUE,printed style writing,star performer	Also, if you use the same elemental, your defenses are raised. But, you have to be careful because the opposite is also true.	また、同じ属性なら防御の効率があがる。だが……逆もまた真なり。気をつけることだな
みぬく	見抜く	v5k, vt	to see through, to see into (someone's heart, mind, etc.), to perceive, to find out, to detect	To see what elementals an enemy has, you need [Sense] Materia. If you get that Materia, you should try using it.	敵のもっている【属性】をみぬくためには【みやぶる】ことが必要だ。マテリアを手にいれたら、使ってみてくれ
みやぶる	見破る	v5r, vt	to see through (a plot, lie, etc.), to penetrate into, to discover, to find out	To see what elementals an enemy has, you need [Sense] Materia. If you get that Materia, you should try using it.	敵のもっている【属性】をみぬくためには【みやぶる】ことが必要だ。マテリアを手にいれたら、使ってみてくれ
しょうぶ	勝負	n, vs	victory or defeat,match, contest, game, bout	OK! Now your limit gauge is full, go ahead and use it! Fight with your limit technique.	よしっ、【リミットゲージ】はいっぱいだ！えんりょはいらない。【リミット技】で勝負だ！
たいこう	対抗	n, vs	opposition, antagonism	Calm down! When your enemy uses magic counter with [Magic Barrier] or [reflect].	おちつけ！相手が魔法を使うときには【マバリア】か【リフレク】で対抗するのだ
はねかえす	跳ね返す	v5s, vt	to reject, to repulse, to repel,to bounce back, to counterattack, to strike back	[reflect] bounces the attacks off you. But the number of times you can use it is limited so be careful.	【リフレク】は魔法をはねかえすがはねかえす回数に制限があるから気をつけろ
かいすう	回数	n	number of times, frequency, count	[reflect] bounces the attacks off you. But the number of times you can use it is limited so be careful.	【リフレク】は魔法をはねかえすがはねかえす回数に制限があるから気をつけろ
せいげん	制限	n, vs	restriction, restraint, limitation, limit	[reflect] bounces the attacks off you. But the number of times you can use it is limited so be careful.	【リフレク】は魔法をはねかえすがはねかえす回数に制限があるから気をつけろ
そだてる	育てる	v1, vt	to raise, to rear, to bring up,to train, to teach, to educate,to promote the growth of, to nurture, to foster, to develop	If you want to get as strong as me you need to use Materia. And you have to find the best combinations of them.	俺みたいに強くなりたければマテリアを効率よく育て最適な組み合わせをさがすことだな
さいてき	最適	adj-na, n, adj-no	optimum, the most suitable	If you want to get as strong as me you need to use Materia. And you have to find the best combinations of them.	俺みたいに強くなりたければマテリアを効率よく育て最適な組み合わせをさがすことだな
くみあわせ	組み合わせ	n	combination, assortment, set,matching (in a contest), pairing,combination	If you want to get as strong as me you need to use Materia. And you have to find the best combinations of them.	俺みたいに強くなりたければマテリアを効率よく育て最適な組み合わせをさがすことだな
そうび	装備	n, vs	equipment	The type of Materia you put in your weapons and armor will determine how quickly your Materia grows.	装備する武器や防具のしゅるいによってマテリアの成長のスピードはちがう
せいちょう	成長	n, vs	growth, development, growing up, becoming an adult,growth (of a company, the economy, etc.)	The type of Materia you put in your weapons and armor will determine how quickly your Materia grows.	装備する武器や防具のしゅるいによってマテリアの成長のスピードはちがう
スピード		n	speed	The type of Materia you put in your weapons and armor will determine how quickly your Materia grows.	装備する武器や防具のしゅるいによってマテリアの成長のスピードはちがう
あく	開く	v5k, vi	to open (e.g. doors),to open (e.g. business, etc.),to be empty,to be vacant, to be available, to be free,to be open (e.g. neckline, etc.),to have been opened (of one's eyes, mouth, etc.),to come to an end,to open (one's eyes, mouth, etc.),to have a hole, to form a gap, to have an interval (between events)	Put Materia into the open slots in your weapons and armor. The possible combinations are limitless.	武器や防具にあいている穴の形によってマテリアの組み合わせは無限に広がる
あな	穴	n, n-suf	hole,deficit, shortage, missing person (in a team, meeting, etc.),vacancy, opening,flaw,profitable place (or item, etc.) not well known by others,upset victory (with a large payoff),pit (of a theater),hiding place,underbelly (of society, etc.)	Put Materia into the open slots in your weapons and armor. The possible combinations are limitless.	武器や防具にあいている穴の形によってマテリアの組み合わせは無限に広がる
むげん	無限	adj-no, adj-na	infinity, infinitude, eternity,infinite, limitless	Put Materia into the open slots in your weapons and armor. The possible combinations are limitless.	武器や防具にあいている穴の形によってマテリアの組み合わせは無限に広がる
アドバイス		n, vs	advice	That's about all I can tell you. If you want to be like me, you have to have some natural talent.	俺にアドバイスできるのはそのくらいのことだ。もっとも生まれついた素質がなければ俺のようにはなれんがな
もっとも	最も	adv	most, extremely	That's about all I can tell you. If you want to be like me, you have to have some natural talent.	俺にアドバイスできるのはそのくらいのことだ。もっとも生まれついた素質がなければ俺のようにはなれんがな
うまれつく	生まれつく	v5k, vi	to be born (with), to be born (to be), to be destined	That's about all I can tell you. If you want to be like me, you have to have some natural talent.	俺にアドバイスできるのはそのくらいのことだ。もっとも生まれついた素質がなければ俺のようにはなれんがな
そしつ	素質	n, adj-no	character, qualities, genius, the makings of	That's about all I can tell you. If you want to be like me, you have to have some natural talent.	俺にアドバイスできるのはそのくらいのことだ。もっとも生まれついた素質がなければ俺のようにはなれんがな
なれる	慣れる	v1, aux-v	to get used to, to grow accustomed to, to become familiar with,to become skilled in, to become experienced at,to become tame, to become domesticated,to get used to doing	That's about all I can tell you. If you want to be like me, you have to have some natural talent.	俺にアドバイスできるのはそのくらいのことだ。もっとも生まれついた素質がなければ俺のようにはなれんがな
おこる	怒る	v5r, vi	to get angry, to get mad,to tell someone off, to scold,to be angular, to be square	Listen kids, don't piss me off!	俺を怒らせるな！
はやる	流行る	v5r, vi	to be popular, to come into fashion,to be prevalent, to spread widely (e.g. disease), to be endemic,to flourish, to thrive	That's all right. Just give it a try. Little by little, you'll get used to it.	大丈夫だ、まずはやってみろ。そのうち、なれてしまう
そのうち	その内	exp, adv	before very long, soon, someday, one of these days, sooner or later,of the previously mentioned, of that number, among them, among others	That's all right. Just give it a try. Little by little, you'll get used to it.	大丈夫だ、まずはやってみろ。そのうち、なれてしまう
じょうでき	上出来	n, adj-no, adj-na	good performance, good work, great success	Great!	上出来だ
そうさ	操作	n, vs	operation, management, handling,manipulating (to one's benefit), manipulation, influencing	How to use the buttons.	『基本的なボタン操作方法』
ほうほう	方法	n	method, process, manner, way, means, technique	How to use the buttons.	『基本的なボタン操作方法』
あるく	歩く	v5k, vi	to walk	leftright: walk  [OK]: speak/execute	左　　　右：歩く　　　□　　○：話す／決定
まがる	曲がる	v5r, vi	to bend, to curve, to warp, to wind, to twist,to turn,to be awry, to be askew, to be crooked	[PAGEUP]/[PAGEDOWN]: turn.	Ｌ１／Ｒ１ボタン：チョコッとまがる
ソフト		n	soft,software,soft hat, felt hat,soft serve ice cream,softball	[How to restart]	『ソフトリセット方法』
リセット		n, vs	reset	[How to restart]	『ソフトリセット方法』
スタート		n, vs	start	You must quit the game in order to restart.	Ｌ１＆Ｌ２＆Ｒ１＆Ｒ２＆セレクト＆スタート
どうじに	同時に	adv, conj	coincident with, while, simultaneously	To quit the game, either select QUIT	以上のボタンを同時に押すとリセットがかかります。
かかる	掛かる	v5r	to take (a resource, e.g. time or money),to hang,to come into view, to arrive,to come under (a contract, a tax),to start (engines, motors),to attend, to deal with, to handle,to have started to, to be on the verge of,to overlap (e.g. information in a manual), to cover,to (come) at,to be fastened,to be covered (e.g. with dust, a table-cloth, etc.),to be caught in,to get a call,to depend on	To quit the game, either select QUIT	以上のボタンを同時に押すとリセットがかかります。
フィールド		n	field	in the Main Menu or press CTRL+Q.	（フィールド上のみ有効）
ゆうこう	有効	n	valid, effective,yuko (judo)	in the Main Menu or press CTRL+Q.	（フィールド上のみ有効）
ゆび	指	n	finger, toe, digit	Huh? Finger!? What the hell?	ん？　指！？なんだ、おまえ？
ポジション		n	position	I'm the position cursor!! Call me whenever you're walking around confused!	ボク、【ポジションカーソル】！！歩いている時、迷ったらボクを呼び出して！
カーソル		n	cursor	I'm the position cursor!! Call me whenever you're walking around confused!	ボク、【ポジションカーソル】！！歩いている時、迷ったらボクを呼び出して！
まよう	迷う	v5u, vi	to lose one's way,to waver, to hesitate, to be of two minds over, to be puzzled, to be perplexed,to give into temptation, to lose control of oneself,to turn in one's grave	I'm the position cursor!! Call me whenever you're walking around confused!	ボク、【ポジションカーソル】！！歩いている時、迷ったらボクを呼び出して！
よびだす	呼び出す	v5s, vt	to summon, to call (e.g. phone), to convene, to decoy, to lure,to invoke (e.g. subroutine), to call, to open (e.g. a file)	I'm the position cursor!! Call me whenever you're walking around confused!	ボク、【ポジションカーソル】！！歩いている時、迷ったらボクを呼び出して！
きみ	君	n	you, buddy, pal,monarch, ruler, sovereign, (one's) master	Push [ASSIST] and I'll appear over your shiny little head.	セレクトボタンを押せばボクが君のツンツン頭のうえにつきまとうよ
つきまとう	付きまとう	v5u, vi	to follow around, to shadow, to tag along	Push [ASSIST] and I'll appear over your shiny little head.	セレクトボタンを押せばボクが君のツンツン頭のうえにつきまとうよ
めだつ	目立つ	v5t, vi	to be conspicuous, to stand out	Geez, you stand out even more than I do…	俺より目立つな……
じゃま	邪魔	n	hindrance, obstacle, nuisance,to visit (somebody's home),demon who hinders Buddhist training, demon who obstructs sentient beings from maintaining moral behaviour	Am I in the way? If so, just push [ASSIST] one more time.	ボクがじゃまかい？そんなときはもう一度セレクトボタンを押してね
けっこう	結構	n	splendid, nice, wonderful, delicious, sweet,sufficient, fine (in the sense of "I'm fine"), (by implication) no thank you,well enough, OK, tolerable,quite, reasonably, fairly, tolerably,construction, architecture	I'm pretty busy myself, and can't always come when you need me. If I don't show up sometimes, don't get mad.	それから、ボクはこう見えてもけっこういそがしいからいつでも登場はできないんだ。でてこなくても怒らないで！
とうじょう	登場	n, vs	entry (on stage), appearance (on screen),entrance, introduction (into a market)	I'm pretty busy myself, and can't always come when you need me. If I don't show up sometimes, don't get mad.	それから、ボクはこう見えてもけっこういそがしいからいつでも登場はできないんだ。でてこなくても怒らないで！
さらに	更に	adv, conj	furthermore, again, after all, more and more, moreover, even more	But wait!!	さらに！！
いりぐち	入口	n, adj-no	entrance, entry, gate, approach, mouth	[Red triangles] mark the exits and [Green triangles] mark ladders.	入口をあらわす『赤サンカク』とはしごなどをあらわす『緑サンカク』も表示されます。
あか	赤	n	red, crimson, scarlet,red-containing colour (e.g. brown, pink, orange),Red (i.e. communist),red light (traffic),red ink (i.e. in finance or proof-reading), (in) the red,complete, total, perfect, obvious,copper	[Red triangles] mark the exits and [Green triangles] mark ladders.	入口をあらわす『赤サンカク』とはしごなどをあらわす『緑サンカク』も表示されます。
よみち	夜道	n	street at night, making a night journey	These will help you safely make it through even the darkest streets or dangerous mountains! But, there are times when they won't appear, so be careful.	これで、暗い夜道も険しい山道もご安心！なお、フィールドによっては表示されないことがあります。御注意ください。
やまみち	山道	n	mountain road, mountain trail	These will help you safely make it through even the darkest streets or dangerous mountains! But, there are times when they won't appear, so be careful.	これで、暗い夜道も険しい山道もご安心！なお、フィールドによっては表示されないことがあります。御注意ください。
むすこ	息子	n	son,penis	Ha!  Ha!…… I wonder if my son's already left?	ハッハッ……。息子はもう旅立ちましたかな？
たびだつ	旅立つ	v5t, vi	to begin a trip, to depart, to embark,to die, to pass away, to depart this life	Ha!  Ha!…… I wonder if my son's already left?	ハッハッ……。息子はもう旅立ちましたかな？
かない	家内	n	(my) wife,inside the home, one's family	When it's just my wife and I here, you have no idea how lonesome it gets.	こうして家内と私、二人きりになってみるといやはや、さびしいものですなあ
きり	切り	prt	end, finish, stop,bounds, limits,delivery date (of a futures contract),finale (of a noh song), end of an act (in jōruri or kabuki), final performance of the day (in vaudeville),counter for slices (esp. thick slices), counter for cuts (e.g. fish, meat),only, just,since, after,remaining (in a particular state)	When it's just my wife and I here, you have no idea how lonesome it gets.	こうして家内と私、二人きりになってみるといやはや、さびしいものですなあ
はねる	跳ねる	v1, vi	to jump, to leap, to prance, to spring up, to bound, to hop,to break up, to close, to come to an end,to hit (e.g. to have a car hit something or someone)	We want him to be happy and do other things while he's young, but we can't help but worry…	ハッハッ……　若いうちはね好きなことをやらせてみようと思っていてもやっぱり心配なのは、いけませんなあ
おや	親	n	parent, parents, mother and father,dealer (in cards, mahjong, etc.), banker,founder, inventor,(pet) owner,key, parent (organization), main,ancestor, forefather	I guess we always will.	親として修行がたりませんなあ
しゅぎょう	修行	n, vs	ascetic practices,training, practice, discipline, study	I guess we always will.	親として修行がたりませんなあ
ふるさと	故郷	n	home town, birthplace, native place, one's old home,ruins, historic remains	Where are you from?	故郷はおありですかな？
かぞく	家族	n, adj-no	family, members of a family	But if you still have a family, you outta at least write them.	でも、もし、あなたにも家族がおありなら手紙ぐらい書いてあげるのが、いいですなあ
てがみ	手紙	n	letter	But if you still have a family, you outta at least write them.	でも、もし、あなたにも家族がおありなら手紙ぐらい書いてあげるのが、いいですなあ
しらんぷり	知らん振り	n, vs	pretending not to know, feigning ignorance	You may leave your home, but it'll always be there for you.	故郷はね、知らんぷりをしていてもいつでも、あなたを待ってますよ
とうじ	当時	n-adv, n-t	at that time, in those days	That was the first major Mako accident, I remember it was all over the news.	当時は、最初の大きな魔晄炉事故ということですいぶん話題になりましたなあ
くすぶる	燻る	v5r, vi	to smoke, to smoulder, to smolder, to sputter,to be sooty, to be smoke-stained,to smoulder (e.g. a dispute), to smolder,to seclude oneself,to live in obscurity, to stay in the same level (of social position, circumstances, etc.)	That was the first major Mako accident, I remember it was all over the news.	当時は、最初の大きな魔晄炉事故ということですいぶん話題になりましたなあ
わだい	話題	n, adj-no	topic, subject	That was the first major Mako accident, I remember it was all over the news.	当時は、最初の大きな魔晄炉事故ということですいぶん話題になりましたなあ
けんざい	健在	adj-na, n	in good health, well, going strong	Is your family still living?	ご家族は健在ですかな？
こどく	孤独	n, adj-na, adj-no	solitude, loneliness, isolation	I'm just an ex-SOLDIER	俺は孤独なソルジャーだ
かっこう	格好	n-suf	shape, form, figure, posture, pose,appearance,state, situation,suitable, fit, reasonable,about	Our boy acted like you, When he was a kid.	ハッハッ……。私も若いころはそんな風にかっこつけたこともありましたよ
そろそろ		adv, adv-to	slowly, quietly, steadily, gradually, gingerly,soon, momentarily, before long, any time now	Well, would you mind leaving us alone?	ハッハッ……。そろそろ、二人っきりにしてくれませんか
しみじみ	沁み沁み	adv, adv-to	keenly, deeply, fully, heartily, seriously, earnestly,calmly, quietly, softly,fixedly (e.g. gazing, staring)	I want to enjoy some quiet time together with my wife.	家内と二人きりの時間というのをね。しみじみすごしたいのですよ
すごす	過ごす	v5s, aux-v	to pass (time), to spend,to overdo (esp. of one's alcohol consumption), to drink (alcohol),to take care of, to support,to overdo, to do too much,to ... without acting on it	I want to enjoy some quiet time together with my wife.	家内と二人きりの時間というのをね。しみじみすごしたいのですよ
ふしぎ	不思議	adj-na, n	wonderful, marvelous, strange, incredible, amazing, curious, miraculous, mysterious	He used to give us nothing but headaches when he was here, but now that he's gone…we kind of miss him. …Strange, isn't it?	あんな子でもいなくなってみるとね。なんだか、落ちつかなくて。……不思議なものね