しゅうてん	終点	n	terminus, last stop (e.g. train)	Last stop is Sector 7, Train Graveyard.	終点、スラム７番街列車基場駅～
とうちゃく	到着	n, vs, adj-no	arrival	Expected time of arrival is 12:23AM,	到着予定時刻はミッドガル時０時２３分……
よてい	予定	n, vs	plans, arrangement, schedule, program, programme, expectation, estimate	Expected time of arrival is 12:23AM,	到着予定時刻はミッドガル時０時２３分……
さわぎ	騒ぎ	n, n-suf	uproar, disturbance	Please don't make any trouble.	騒ぎはおこさないでくださいよぅ
おこす	起こす	v5s, vt	to raise, to raise up, to set up, to pick up,to wake, to wake up, to waken, to awaken,to cause, to bring about, to lead to, to trigger, to give rise to, to create, to generate (e.g. heat, electricity), to produce,to start, to begin, to launch, to establish, to found, to set up, to open,to plough, to plow, to till,to fall ill with,to transcribe, to write down (what is spoken),to turn over (a card)	Please don't make any trouble.	騒ぎはおこさないでくださいよぅ
ぶつぶつ		n, adv, adv-to	grunt, grumble, complaint, mutter,pimples, spots, eruption, rash,cutting into small pieces,simmering	…mumble…grumble… (…Reactor's blown to bits… …Bad things one after another… …What a day!)	ブツブツ……（はあ、悪いことは続くもんだ。今夜は魔晄炉事故のダイヤの乱れで大変な一日だったのに）
つづく	続く	v5k, vi	to continue, to last, to go on,to continue (without a break), to be unbroken,to occur again and again,to lead to, to connect to, to adjoin,to come after, to follow, to succeed, to rank next to,to hold out, to keep, to last	…mumble…grumble… (…Reactor's blown to bits… …Bad things one after another… …What a day!)	ブツブツ……（はあ、悪いことは続くもんだ。今夜は魔晄炉事故のダイヤの乱れで大変な一日だったのに）
ダイヤ		n	diamond,(railway) schedule, timetable,diagram	…mumble…grumble… (…Reactor's blown to bits… …Bad things one after another… …What a day!)	ブツブツ……（はあ、悪いことは続くもんだ。今夜は魔晄炉事故のダイヤの乱れで大変な一日だったのに）
みだれ	乱れ	n	disorder, disturbance, unrest	…mumble…grumble… (…Reactor's blown to bits… …Bad things one after another… …What a day!)	ブツブツ……（はあ、悪いことは続くもんだ。今夜は魔晄炉事故のダイヤの乱れで大変な一日だったのに）
めいわく	迷惑	vs	trouble, bother, annoyance, nuisance, inconvenience,to be troubled (by), to be bothered (by), to be inconvenienced (by)	Please!! Don't bother the other passengers.	たのみますよぅ！！他のお客さんの迷惑になりますから…
しゅうでん	終電	n	last train	This is why I hate the last train. Hoo-boy…	これだから終電はまいるよ…。はあ……
ごうがい	号外	n	newspaper extra	You see the headlines in the Shinra Times?	神羅新聞の号外見たかい？
テロリスト		n	terrorist	The terrorists that bombed the No. 1 Reactor are based somewhere in the slums.	壱番魔晄炉爆破のテロリストはスラムにひそんでるらしいぞ
ひそむ	潜む	v5m, vi	to lurk, to be hidden, to be concealed, to lie dormant, to be latent	The terrorists that bombed the No. 1 Reactor are based somewhere in the slums.	壱番魔晄炉爆破のテロリストはスラムにひそんでるらしいぞ
リーダー		n	leader,reader, reading book,reader (i.e. someone who reads),microreader,dotted line (in printing), leaders, ellipsis mark	…Blowing up a Reactor… they sure put some thought into this one.	しかし、魔晄炉爆破とは考えたよな。リーダーはさしずめ頭の切れるヤツだな。次は、何やるんだろな？
さしずめ	差し詰め	adv	after all, in the end, when all's said and done,for the time being, at present	…Blowing up a Reactor… they sure put some thought into this one.	しかし、魔晄炉爆破とは考えたよな。リーダーはさしずめ頭の切れるヤツだな。次は、何やるんだろな？
くう	食う	v5u, vt	to eat,to live, to make a living, to survive,to bite, to sting (as insects do),to tease, to torment, to taunt, to make light of, to make fun of,to encroach on, to eat into, to consume,to defeat a superior, to threaten a position,to consume time and-or resources,to receive something (usu. an unfavourable event),to have sexual relations with a woman, esp. for the first time	They must have a real calculating leader. I wonder what they'll do next?	ごめんよ……ちょっと気分が…変なもん食ったからなあ。あのミッドガル名物のプレートピザ…
こいつ	此奴	int	he, she, this fellow, this guy, this person,this, this one, this thing,Hey, you!, You bastard!, Damn you!	This ain't no private car!! So split up!!	こいつぁ、貸し切り列車じゃねえぞ！！散れ散れ！！
かしきり	貸し切り	n, adj-no	reserving, chartering, engaging, reservation	This ain't no private car!! So split up!!	こいつぁ、貸し切り列車じゃねえぞ！！散れ散れ！！
つくづく	熟	adv, adv-to	deeply, keenly, severely, completely, utterly,intently, carefully, closely, attentively	…Hoodlums again. God, don't I just have all the luck?	また危ない人たちといっしょか。私もつくづく運がないな
うん	運	n	fortune, luck	…Hoodlums again. God, don't I just have all the luck?	また危ない人たちといっしょか。私もつくづく運がないな
すく	空く	v5k, vi	to become less crowded, to thin out, to get empty,to be hungry	Now look at that!! It got empty alluva sudden.	おいっ！！ずいぶんすいてやがるな
でかける	出かける	v1, vi	to go out (e.g. on an excursion or outing), to leave, to depart, to start, to set out,to be about to leave, to be just going out	Only devoted employees like me would go to Midgar on a day like today.	こんな日にミッドガルに出かけるのは仕事熱心な私たちサラリーマン神羅ぐらいさ
ねっしん	熱心	adj-na, n	zealous, enthusiastic, ardent, fervent, keen, eager	Only devoted employees like me would go to Midgar on a day like today.	こんな日にミッドガルに出かけるのは仕事熱心な私たちサラリーマン神羅ぐらいさ
サラリーマン		n	office worker, company employee, company man	Only devoted employees like me would go to Midgar on a day like today.	こんな日にミッドガルに出かけるのは仕事熱心な私たちサラリーマン神羅ぐらいさ
かちょう	課長	n	section manager, section chief	Shinra Manager	神羅課長
くっする	屈する	vs-s, vi	to yield, to give in, to be daunted, to shrink,to bend (knee, etc.),to subdue, to overpower,to feel down	I won't give in to violence… and I'm not giving you my seat either!	わ、私は暴力にはくっしないぞ～。こ、この席だって、ゆずらない
ゆずる	譲る	v5r, vt	to hand over, to transfer, to turn over, to assign, to convey, to bequeath,to give up (e.g. one's seat), to give way,to yield, to concede, to give ground, to surrender,to sell,to postpone, to put off, to defer	I won't give in to violence… and I'm not giving you my seat either!	わ、私は暴力にはくっしないぞ～。こ、この席だって、ゆずらない
ついてる	付いてる	exp, v1	to be lucky, to be in luck,to be attached, to have, to be included, to come with, to contain, to be in a state	&$#%!! You lucky ^$#^$.!	チッ！！あんた、ついてるぜ
ペース		n	pace	@#$%! The hell you so calm? You're bustin' up my rhythm!	ケッ！　落ちついた野郎だぜ！こっちのペースがくるっちまう…
くるう	狂う	v5u, vi	to go mad,to get out of order, to go amiss	@#$%! The hell you so calm? You're bustin' up my rhythm!	ケッ！　落ちついた野郎だぜ！こっちのペースがくるっちまう…
いまや	今や	adv	now (esp. in contrast to the past), now at last, at present, right now	What are you talking about? Right about now, AVALANCHE is famous.	なにいってるのよ！アバランチはいまや有名なのよ
せつぞく	接続	n, vs	connection, attachment, union, join, joint, link,changing trains,conjunction	Looks like they just finished connecting the cars. We're finally leaving.	列車の接続がすんだみたい。出発するわ
きょうかい	境界	n	boundary	Jessie's probably already told you, but there's a security check point at the top plate.	ジェシーから聞いただろうが上のプレートとの境界には検間がある。列車ごとＩＤスキャンするシステムだ
スキャン		n, vs	scan	Jessie's probably already told you, but there's a security check point at the top plate.	ジェシーから聞いただろうが上のプレートとの境界には検間がある。列車ごとＩＤスキャンするシステムだ
じまん	自慢	n, vs, adj-no	pride, boast	It's an ID scan system checkin' all the trains.	神羅じまんのね
たつ	断つ	v5t, vt	to sever, to cut off,to suppress, to eradicate, to exterminate,to abstain (from), to give up	Alright, in three minutes, we're jumpin' off this train.	よし、あと３分たったら列車から飛び降りる
とびおりる	飛び下りる	v1, vi	to jump down, to jump off, to jump from, to jump out of	Alright, in three minutes, we're jumpin' off this train.	よし、あと３分たったら列車から飛び降りる
どうも		int	thank you, thanks,much (thanks), very (sorry), quite (regret),quite, really, mostly,somehow,in spite of oneself, try as one might, no matter how hard one may try (to, not to),greetings, hello, goodbye	The hell do I care whatcha do? Just siddown an' shu'up.	どうもこうもねえ。そのへん、すわってろ
あいにく	生憎	adj-na, adv, n, adj-no	unfortunately, Sorry, but ...	Sorry, but I have a thing against sitting down in trains.	あいにく、列車ではすわらない主義でね
しゅぎ	主義	n	doctrine, rule, principle, -ism	Sorry, but I have a thing against sitting down in trains.	あいにく、列車ではすわらない主義でね
しったかぶり	知ったかぶり	n, vs	pretending to know	So let's hear YOUR explanation!	おまえさんの知ったかぶり説明が聞きてえもんだな！
てつだう	手伝う	v5u, vt	to help, to assist, to aid,to contribute to, to be a factor in	I'll help, too.	私も手伝うね
しき	式	n, n-suf	equation, formula, expression,ceremony,style,enforcement regulations (of the ritsuryo)	Type A Security Alert!!	Ａ式非常警戒体制を発動
けいかい	警戒	n, vs	vigilance, caution, alertness, precaution, being on guard	Type A Security Alert!!	Ａ式非常警戒体制を発動
はつどう	発動	n, vs	putting into operation,invocation	Type A Security Alert!!	Ａ式非常警戒体制を発動
しゃりょう	車両	n	rolling stock, railroad cars, wheeled vehicles	A search of all cars will be conducted!	各車両緊急チェックに入ります　　
きんきゅう	緊急	n, adj-no, adj-na	urgency, emergency	A search of all cars will be conducted!	各車両緊急チェックに入ります　　
くりかえす	繰り返す	v5s, vt, vi	to repeat, to do something over again	Repeat!!	くりかえします
ずい	隋	n	Sui (dynasty of China, 581-619 CE)	We're in trouble.	まっずいことになっちゃったわ
しくじる		v5r, vi	to fail, to blunder, to mess up, to screw up,to be dismissed, to be fired	@#$%! Someone blew it…	チッ！しくじりやがったな…
もたもた		adv, adv-to, vs	slowly, inefficiently, tardily, dawdling	Let's go! Keep it up!	いくぜ！モタモタすんな！
けらい	家来	n	retainer, retinue, servant	Hmmm? You're the only ones that'll talk to me or come to my house.	ん……？俺ん家来て、あいさつするのはあんただけ
あいさつ	挨拶	n	greeting, greetings, salutation, salute, polite set phrase used when meeting or parting from somebody,polite set phrase used to express apology, sympathy, congratulations, etc.,speech (congratulatory or appreciative), address,reply, response,revenge, retaliation,a fine thing to say,dialoging (with another Zen practitioner to ascertain their level of enlightenment),relationship (between people), connection,intervention, mediation, mediator	Hmmm? You're the only ones that'll talk to me or come to my house.	ん……？俺ん家来て、あいさつするのはあんただけ
かんしん	感心	n, vs	admiration, being impressed,admirable, praiseworthy,astonishment, being appalled	I'm impressed.	感心、感心
ほうび	褒美	n	reward, prize	I'm really impressed. Here's a little something as a reward.	これまた、感心、感心。ごほうびに、いいものをあげよ
フェニックス		n	phoenix (bird of Egyptian mythology),phoenix (any palm tree of genus Phoenix, incl. the date palm)	Received "Phoenix Down"!	フェニックスの尾を手にいれた！
お	尾	n	tail (animal, kite, comet, etc.), tail end,slope at the foot of a mountain	Received "Phoenix Down"!	フェニックスの尾を手にいれた！
たれる	垂れる	v1, vi	to hang, to droop, to dangle, to sag, to lower, to pull down,to leave behind (at death), to give, to confer,to drip, to ooze, to trickle, to drop	If I die in the gutter, use that to revive me, okay?	俺がのたれ死んだらそいつでたのむよ
かまう	構う	v5u, vt	to mind, to care about, to be concerned about, to have a regard for,to be an issue, to matter, to create inconvenience,to keep company, to care for, to look after, to entertain, to pay attention to, to spend time with,to interfere with, to meddle in,to tease,to banish, to prohibit	Don't…don't worry about me. (oh man, oh man, oh man…!! I'm gonna brag to everyone at work about this…)	わ、私にはかまわないでくれたまえ。（ヒッヒッ……会社のみんなにじまんしちゃおう…）
かんりょう	完了	n	completion, conclusion,perfect (tense, form, aspect)	Car #1: Locked Down	車両１ドアロック完了
ごそう	護送	n, vs	escort (e.g. under guard), convoy	Car being sent to the station	未確認ＩＤを駅まで護送します　　
レベル		n	level, standard, amount, degree, grade, rank, class,level (plane), floor, storey (story), layer, stratum,spirit level, (surveyor's) level,minor release sequence number (software versioning),rebel	Level 1 Warning	警戒レベル１
まちがえる	間違える	v1, vt	to make a mistake (in), to commit an error (e.g. in calculation),to confuse, to mistake something for something else	Sorry!! I've made a mistake…	ごめん！！まちがえちゃったの…
いえる	言える	v1	to be possible to say, to be able to say	Ugh! I'm not sure…	え……！いえない
あそぶ	遊ぶ	v5b, vi	to play, to enjoy oneself, to have a good time,to mess about (with alcohol, gambling, philandery, etc.),to be idle, to do nothing, to be unused,to go to (for pleasure or for study),to intentionally throw a ball to lower the batter's concentration	C'mon, this ain't no joke!	あそびじゃねえんだぞ
とびら	扉	n	door, gate, opening,title page	They're locking the door, sir!	扉ロックされるっす！
じっこう	実行	n, vs	execution (e.g. of a plan), carrying out, practice, action, implementation, fulfillment, realization	We'll execute it just as we planned it.	おれたちは予定通り例のアレを実行する
うつる	写る	v5r, vi	to be photographed, to be projected	I'm goin' first, sir! Let's switch to Plan 2!	先、行くっす！作戦その２にうつるっす
おしまい	お仕舞い	int	the end, closing, being done for,that's it, that's enough, that's all	What!? That's it!?	チッ！！もうおしまいかよ！
こうきゅう	高給	n	high salary	We'll jump from here!! Follow me, you 'spensive leech!!	こっから飛び降りるぞ！！オレに続け、高給取り！！
とり	取り	pref	taking, taker, collecting, collector, remover, removal,last performer of the day (usu. the star performer), last performance of the day,active partner (e.g. in judo demonstration),emphatic or formal prefix	We'll jump from here!! Follow me, you 'spensive leech!!	こっから飛び降りるぞ！！オレに続け、高給取り！！
ひょっと		adv, vs	possibly, perhaps, perchance,unintentionally, accidentally	Does this mean that we're in a major bind?	ひょっとしてこれボクら、大ピンチってやつかい？
なか	仲	n	relation, relationship	Please behave while you're in the train.	列車のなかではおぎょうぎよくしてね
まちがい	間違い	n	mistake, error, blunder,accident, mishap, trouble,improper conduct (e.g. between man and woman), indiscretion	My mistake	まちがいだ
ほうし	奉仕	n, vs	service, ministry, attendance, church work,offering goods at a reduced price, providing a service for free	Wow! I won't even charge you…	ホゥ！無料ほうしにしとくぜ
ぜんはん	前半	n	first half	Unidentified Passengers:	未確認ＩＤは列車前半部に移動中
ぶ	部	ctr	department (in an organization), division, bureau,club,part, component, element,category,counter for copies of a newspaper or magazine	Unidentified Passengers:	未確認ＩＤは列車前半部に移動中
いどう	移動	adj-f	movement, transfer, migration, removal, travel,mobile, moving, traveling, travelling, roving	Unidentified Passengers:	未確認ＩＤは列車前半部に移動中
いち	位置	n, vs	place, situation, position, location	Currently tracking location	現在位置の再確認に入ります
ばれる		v1, vi	to leak out (a secret), to be exposed (a lie, improper behaviour, etc.) (behavior),to get away (fish)	Not yet. They're starting another check. If we're caught, we're done for!	まだよ、すぐ次の検知がはじまるわ。バレたらアウトよ！
アウト		exp	out (in baseball, tennis, etc.),outer, external, outside,no good, out of line, unacceptable, failure	Not yet. They're starting another check. If we're caught, we're done for!	まだよ、すぐ次の検知がはじまるわ。バレたらアウトよ！
じゅんじゅん	順々	adv, n	in order, in turn	But, don't worry. If we move up the train, car by car, we should get past it!	でも、心配しないで。前の車両に順々にうつっていけばやりすごせるわ！
かせる	痂せる	v1, vi	to dry up, to scab, to slough,to be poisoned (with lacquer),to waste away	You want an explanation? OK!! Let me.	説明？　いいの？ＯＫ！！　まっかせといて
そうち	装置	n	equipment, device, installation, apparatus,stage setting	This train's security system is the old Shinra A system.	この列車の警戒装置は、旧型の神羅Ａ式
きゅうがた	旧型	n	old style, old type	This train's security system is the old Shinra A system.	この列車の警戒装置は、旧型の神羅Ａ式
かこむ	囲む	v5m, vt	to surround, to encircle, to enclose, to fence, to wall in,to besiege, to lay siege to,to play (go, shogi, etc.)	It'll stay locked until it gets to the station, where Shinra guards will be waiting.	そのまま、駅に護送されて神羅警備兵にかこまれちゃうってわけよ
きゅうしき	旧式	adj-na, adj-no	old type, old style	But it's an old system, we can get past it.	でも、旧式だけにちょろいもんよ
なみ	波	n	wave	The second detection scan should be coming up pretty soon. Let's go to the next car!	もうすぐ、２波のパルスが来るわ。さ、次の車両へ！
パルス		n	pulse	The second detection scan should be coming up pretty soon. Let's go to the next car!	もうすぐ、２波のパルスが来るわ。さ、次の車両へ！
ミス		n	mistake, error, failure,Miss,myth	It's my fault that we didn't clear the ID scan.	列車のＩＤスキャンのミス私のせいなの
カード		n	card,curd,match, game, [object Object]	I modified the ID card for CLOUD and that's what made the sensors go off.	CLOUDのＩＤカード。私の特別製にしたから…あんなことに
せい	製	n, n-suf	-made, make	I modified the ID card for CLOUD and that's what made the sensors go off.	CLOUDのＩＤカード。私の特別製にしたから…あんなことに
こめる	込める	v1, vi	to load (a gun, etc.), to charge,to put into (e.g. emotion, effort),to include (e.g. tax in a sales price),to hang over, to shroud, to enshroud, to envelop, to screen	I did my best, but it just didn't work.	心をこめたつもりだったんだけどね。失敗しちゃった
つもり	積もり	n	intention, plan,conviction, belief	I did my best, but it just didn't work.	心をこめたつもりだったんだけどね。失敗しちゃった
まし	増し	n	better, less objectionable, preferable,more, increase, extra,increase, growth	I'll make a better one next time.	こんどはもっとましなものプレゼントするわ。
けんきゅう	研究	n, vs	study, research, investigation	I'll head back to the hideout first and work on research and development.	先にアジトに帰って研究開発にはげんでるからね
かいはつ	開発	n, adj-no, vs	development, exploitation	I'll head back to the hideout first and work on research and development.	先にアジトに帰って研究開発にはげんでるからね
はげむ	励む	v5m	to strive, to endeavour, to endeavor, to make an effort, to be zealous	I'll head back to the hideout first and work on research and development.	先にアジトに帰って研究開発にはげんでるからね
どんぶり	丼	n	porcelain bowl,donburi, bowl of meat, fish, etc. served over rice	Don't worry! Don't worry!	どんまい！どんまい！
むぎ	麦	n	wheat, barley, oat (oats)	urrrrrrrg	むぎゅ～～
にげば	逃げ場	n	refuge, escape	…Nowhere to run…	に、逃げ場がない……
かえし	返し	n	reversal, return,return gift, return favour (favor),barb (on a fishing hook),mixture of soy sauce, sugar and mirin	I'm SO sorry. I'll give it back…	すいましぇ～ん。返しま～しゅ
としうえ	年上	n, adj-no	older, senior	That scary broad made me take the bomb.	こわい年上の女性がわたしに爆弾をつきつけて……
じょせい	女性	n, adj-no	woman, female,feminine gender	That scary broad made me take the bomb.	こわい年上の女性がわたしに爆弾をつきつけて……
つきつける	突き付ける	v1, vt	to thrust before, to thrust at	That scary broad made me take the bomb.	こわい年上の女性がわたしに爆弾をつきつけて……
はい	肺	n	lung	Of course I couldn't very well refuse her!	ことわれませんでした、ハイ
ぶるぶる		adv, adv-to, vs	trembling (with fear, anger, etc.), shivering (with cold), shaking, quivering	Brrrrrr…	ブルブルブル……
ブル		n, adj-no	bull,bulldog,bulldozer,bourgeois, bourgeoisie	Brrrrrr…	ブルブルブル……
はぐ	剥ぐ	v5g, vt	to tear off, to peel off, to rip off, to strip off, to skin, to flay, to bark,to strip of (clothes, rank, etc.), to deprive of, to divest of	It's terrible. Who'd expect underwear bandits in this day and age?	ひどいんです。いまどき、おいはぎ。みぐるみはぐんですから
ぐるみ		suf	(together) with, -wide, including	It's terrible. Who'd expect underwear bandits in this day and age?	ひどいんです。いまどき、おいはぎ。みぐるみはぐんですから
いまさら	今更	adv	now (after such a long time), at this late hour (i.e. it is too late for something), at this point of time,afresh, anew, again	Too late for that now. Why'd you come along anyway?	いまさらなんだよ。だいたい、どうして来たんだ？
ふたり	二人	n	two persons, two people, pair, couple	Hey you two! There ain't no time for that!	おふたりさん時間がないぞ！
きめる	決める	v1, vt	to decide, to choose, to determine, to make up one's mind, to resolve, to set one's heart on, to settle, to arrange, to set, to appoint, to fix,to clinch (a victory), to decide (the outcome of a match),to persist in doing, to go through with,to always do, to have made a habit of,to take for granted, to assume,to dress up, to dress to kill, to dress to the nines,to carry out successfully (a move in sports, a pose in dance, etc.), to succeed in doing,to immobilize with a double-arm lock (in sumo, judo, etc.),to eat or drink something, to take illegal drugs	Yeah!! I've made up my mind!	うん！！決めた！
のこる	残る	v5r, vi	to remain, to be left	A leader always stays till the end.	リーダーは最後まで残るもんだ
すける	透ける	v1, vi	to be transparent, to show through	I look just like my little brother in these clothes…	関係ないすけどこのかっこう……俺の弟にそっくりなんすよ
そっくり		adj-na	all, altogether, entirely, completely,exactly like, just like	I look just like my little brother in these clothes…	関係ないすけどこのかっこう……俺の弟にそっくりなんすよ
せいふく	制服	n	uniform	Do I look good in a Shinra uniform?	神羅の制服、似合ってるかな？
それどころ	其れ処	exp, adj-no	(not) so much, (not) that much	Not now	いまはそれどころじゃない
すてき	素敵	adj-na	lovely, wonderful, nice, great, fantastic, superb, cool	…You look great, just like a man.	……すてきだよ、男勝りで
おとこまさり	男勝り	adj-na, adj-no, n	(of a woman) strong-minded, spirited, mannish	…You look great, just like a man.	……すてきだよ、男勝りで
しゅうちゅう	集中	n	concentration, focusing, convergence, centralization, integration, gathering together,within a collection of works	Just concentrate on our plan.	今は作戦に集中しろ
トンネル		n, vs	tunnel,to tunnel (through a potential barrier),letting a grounder go through one's legs	Winding Tunnel	螺旋トンネル
ないぶ	内部	n, adj-no	interior, inside, internal	4th Street Plate Int.	４番街プレート内部
かぶ	下部	n	lower part, substructure,subordinate (office), good and faithful servant	Lower Sector 4 Plate	４番街プレート下部
おび	帯	n	obi, [object Object],paper wrapper on books, CDs, etc.	Those light beams are the Shinra's security sensors. We can't go any further.	この光の帯は、神羅の警報センサー。これ以上、奥には進めないな
センサー		n	sensor	Those light beams are the Shinra's security sensors. We can't go any further.	この光の帯は、神羅の警報センサー。これ以上、奥には進めないな
おく	奥	n	inner part, inside, interior, depths (e.g. of a forest), back (of a house, drawer, etc.), bottom (e.g. of one's heart), recesses, heart	Those light beams are the Shinra's security sensors. We can't go any further.	この光の帯は、神羅の警報センサー。これ以上、奥には進めないな
しゅうげき	襲撃	n, vs	attack, charge, raid	A terrorist attack!	テロリストの襲撃だ！
おそう	襲う	v5u, vt	to attack, to assail, to make an assault, to strike, to hunt down,to succeed (someone in a post, role, etc.),to make a sudden visit	AVALANCHE is attacking!	アバランチが襲ってきたぞ！
しんにゅう	侵入	n, vs, adj-no	invasion, incursion, raid, aggression, intrusion, trespass, penetration	Intruders!	侵入者だ！
ぞうえん	増援	n, vs	reinforcement (e.g. of troops)	More security's coming. It's dangerous to stay here.	警備兵の増援が来るようだ。このままでは、危ない
ふみ	文	n	letter, writings	Stay here	ふみ止まる
ちい	地位	n	(social) position, status	That's one damn tiny hole. You tellin' me to squeeze into that to get under the Plate? No way!	か～っ、せまっちい穴だな。ここからプレートの下にもぐれってのか？たまんねぇぜ
もぐる	潜る	v5r, vi	to dive (into or under water),to get under, to get into, to get in, to creep into, to crawl under, to bury oneself, to burrow into, to dig oneself into, to snuggle under,to hide oneself (esp. from the government), to conceal oneself, to go underground	That's one damn tiny hole. You tellin' me to squeeze into that to get under the Plate? No way!	か～っ、せまっちい穴だな。ここからプレートの下にもぐれってのか？たまんねぇぜ
のんびり		adv, adv-to, vs	carefree, at leisure	Don't be wastin' time. Never know when the Shinra'll find us.	のんびりしてるヒマはないぜ。いつ神羅のやつらにおれたちの行動がばれないとも限らない
かぎる	限る	v5r, vi	to restrict, to limit, to confine,to be restricted to, to be limited to, to be confined to,to be best (for), to be the best plan, to be the only way (to)	Don't be wastin' time. Never know when the Shinra'll find us.	のんびりしてるヒマはないぜ。いつ神羅のやつらにおれたちの行動がばれないとも限らない
ぞっと		adv, vs	shuddering, shivering, trembling, being horrified, being disgusted	But, damn man, that thing gives me the chills.	でもよ、ゾッとしねぇな
とおる	通る	suf, v5r	to go by, to go past, to go along, to travel along, to pass through, to use (a road), to take (a route), to go via, to go by way of,to run (between), to operate (between), to connect,to go indoors, to go into a room, to be admitted, to be shown in, to be ushered in, to come in,to penetrate, to pierce, to skewer, to go through, to come through,to permeate, to soak into, to spread throughout,to carry (e.g. of a voice), to reach far,to be passed on (e.g. of a customer's order to the kitchen), to be relayed, to be conveyed,to pass (a test, a bill in the House, etc.), to be approved, to be accepted,to go by (a name), to be known as, to be accepted as, to have a reputation for,to be coherent, to be logical, to be reasonable, to be comprehensible, to be understandable, to make sense,to get across (e.g. of one's point), to be understood,to be straight (e.g. wood grain),to be well-informed, to be wise,to do ... completely, to do ... thoroughly	Whaddya mean we're not goin' in? There ain't no other way of gettin' to the Sector 5 reactor 'cept through here.	入らねぇのか？ここを通る以外には、五番魔晄炉にいく方法はないんだぜ
いがい	以外	n-adv	with the exception of, excepting	Whaddya mean we're not goin' in? There ain't no other way of gettin' to the Sector 5 reactor 'cept through here.	入らねぇのか？ここを通る以外には、五番魔晄炉にいく方法はないんだぜ
ダクト		n	duct	…Doesn't seem to be anything that'll get us stuck in this duct.	……ダクトの中に足がかりになりそうなものはないわね
あしがかり	足掛かり	n	foothold	…Doesn't seem to be anything that'll get us stuck in this duct.	……ダクトの中に足がかりになりそうなものはないわね
せわ	世話	n, vs	looking after, help, aid, assistance	After coming this far, only an amateur'd get caught by a security sensor.	ここまで来て警報センサーの世話になるなんてのは、シロウトだけだ
みつかる	見つかる	v5r, vi	to be found, to be discovered	That was close. I thought we were gonna get caught…	やばかったぜ。神羅のやつらに見つかるかと思った……
てまえ	手前	pn	before, this side,one's standpoint, one's appearance,we,you	Oh man…… We were forced to get this far out.	なんてこった……こんな手前で降りるハメになっちまった
たどりつく	たどり着く	v5k, vi	to arrive at (after a struggle), to finally reach, to find one's way to, to finally hit on (e.g. an idea)	Don't let your guard down till we get to the Sector 5 reactor.	しかし、五番魔晄炉にたどり着くまでは油断は禁物だぜ
きんもつ	禁物	n	taboo, forbidden thing	Don't let your guard down till we get to the Sector 5 reactor.	しかし、五番魔晄炉にたどり着くまでは油断は禁物だぜ
せんにゅう	潜入	n, vs	infiltration, sneaking in	They probably don't know we sneaked in yet. We'll be at the reactor in no time.	まだ、オレたちが潜入したことはバレていないはずだ。五番魔晄炉まで一気に行けるぞ
いっきに	一気に	adv	in one go, in one gulp, in one breath, without stopping, without pausing, without resting, in one sitting, at a stretch, all at once,immediately, instantly, right away, straight away, straightaway	They probably don't know we sneaked in yet. We'll be at the reactor in no time.	まだ、オレたちが潜入したことはバレていないはずだ。五番魔晄炉まで一気に行けるぞ
のこのこ		adv, adv-to	unconcernedly, nonchalantly, shamelessly, brazenly	We can't just go back now. We've gotta go on.	しかし、今さらノコノコ引き返すことはできねぇ。このまま進むしかねぇ
ひきかえす	引き返す	v5s, vt	to turn back, to go back, to come back, to return, to retrace one's steps	We can't just go back now. We've gotta go on.	しかし、今さらノコノコ引き返すことはできねぇ。このまま進むしかねぇ
すすむ	進む	v5m, vi	to advance, to go forward,to precede, to go ahead (of),to make progress, to improve,to deepen, to heighten,to be fast (of a clock), to be ahead,to do of one's own free will	We can't just go back now. We've gotta go on.	しかし、今さらノコノコ引き返すことはできねぇ。このまま進むしかねぇ
せんこう	先行	n, vs, adj-no	preceding, going first, leading, going ahead, taking priority	Biggs, Wedge and Jessie got everything ready for us. So MOVE it.	ビッグス、ウェッジ、ジェシーが先行している手はずになってる。行くぞ、おまえら
てはず	手はず	n	arrangement, plan, programme, program	Biggs, Wedge and Jessie got everything ready for us. So MOVE it.	ビッグス、ウェッジ、ジェシーが先行している手はずになってる。行くぞ、おまえら
あいつ	彼奴	pn	he, she, that guy	Biggs, Wedge, and Jessie did good. Now, it's our turn!	ビッグス、ウェッジ、ジェシーはうまくやったようだな。さぁて、あいつらに追いつくぜ！
おいつく	追いつく	v5k, vi	to catch up (with), to draw level, to pull even, to reach,to be compensated, to make up for one's losses	Biggs, Wedge, and Jessie did good. Now, it's our turn!	ビッグス、ウェッジ、ジェシーはうまくやったようだな。さぁて、あいつらに追いつくぜ！
おちあう	落ち合う	v5u, vi	to meet, to meet up, to rendezvous, to get together,to join (of roads, rivers, etc.), to flow together	We're gonna pull out now. We'll meet up at the hideout.	おれたちは、これで引き上げる。アジトで落ち合おうぜ
パパ		n	Papa	Did Sephiroth do this to you?	パパ……
わな	罠	n	snare, trap (for catching wild game, etc.),trap (i.e. ruse, subterfuge, etc.)	…A trap…	……ワナ、か
きみたち	君たち	pn	you (plural), all of you, you all	Hmm… So you all must be… What was it?	ほほう。君たちがアレかね。……なんて言ったかな？
たしかに	確かに	adv	surely, certainly	You're the one who quit SOLDIER and joined AVALANCHE. I knew you'd been exposed to Mako, from the look in your eyes…	アバランチとやらに参加しているという元ソルジャー。たしかにその目の輝きは魔晄を浴びた者……
かがやき	輝き	n	brightness, brilliance, brilliancy, radiance, glitter	You're the one who quit SOLDIER and joined AVALANCHE. I knew you'd been exposed to Mako, from the look in your eyes…	アバランチとやらに参加しているという元ソルジャー。たしかにその目の輝きは魔晄を浴びた者……
あびる	浴びる	v1, vt	to dash over oneself (e.g. water), to take (e.g. shower), to bask in (e.g. the sun), to bathe in, to be flooded with (e.g. light), to be covered in,to suffer (e.g. an attack), to draw (e.g. criticism, attention, praise), to have heaped upon, to be showered with	You're the one who quit SOLDIER and joined AVALANCHE. I knew you'd been exposed to Mako, from the look in your eyes…	アバランチとやらに参加しているという元ソルジャー。たしかにその目の輝きは魔晄を浴びた者……
うらぎりもの	裏切り者	n	betrayer, traitor, turncoat, informer	Tell me, traitor… what was your name?	その裏切り者の名前はなんといったかな？
いちいち	一々	adv, n	one-by-one, separately,every single, each and every, without omission, fully, in detail	Forgive me for asking, but I can't be expected to remember everyone's name.	すまないがソルジャーの名前なんていちいち覚えとらんのでな
せめて		adv	at least, at most	Unless you become another Sephiroth.	せめてセフィロスぐらいにはなってもらわんと
ゆうしゅう	優秀	adj-na, n	superiority, excellence	Aah, Sephiroth… He was brilliant. Perhaps too brilliant.	そう、セフィロス……。優秀なソルジャーであった。そう、優秀すぎる……な
すぎる	過ぎる	v1, vi, suf	to pass through, to pass by, to go beyond,to pass (i.e. of time), to elapse,to have expired, to have ended, to be over,to exceed, to surpass, to be above,to be no more than ...,to be excessive, to be too much, to be too ...	Aah, Sephiroth… He was brilliant. Perhaps too brilliant.	そう、セフィロス……。優秀なソルジャーであった。そう、優秀すぎる……な
なく	泣く	v5k	to cry, to weep, to sob, to howl	Don't give a damn 'bout none of that! This place's goin' up with a big BANG soon! Serves y'all right!	んなこたぁ、どうでもいい！もうすぐここはドッカン！！だぜ！ざまあみやがれ！
ざま	様	suf	mess, sorry state, plight, sad sight,-ways, -wards,in the act of ..., just as one is ...,manner of ..., way of ...	Don't give a damn 'bout none of that! This place's goin' up with a big BANG soon! Serves y'all right!	んなこたぁ、どうでもいい！もうすぐここはドッカン！！だぜ！ざまあみやがれ！
あみ	網	n	net, netting,web	Don't give a damn 'bout none of that! This place's goin' up with a big BANG soon! Serves y'all right!	んなこたぁ、どうでもいい！もうすぐここはドッカン！！だぜ！ざまあみやがれ！
がれ		n	scree	Don't give a damn 'bout none of that! This place's goin' up with a big BANG soon! Serves y'all right!	んなこたぁ、どうでもいい！もうすぐここはドッカン！！だぜ！ざまあみやがれ！
うじ	氏	n, suf	family name, lineage, birth,clan	And such a waste of good fireworks, just to get rid of vermin like you…	そうだな。キミたちウジ虫を始末するには高物すぎる花火ではあるが……
むし	虫	n	insect, bug, cricket, moth, worm	And such a waste of good fireworks, just to get rid of vermin like you…	そうだな。キミたちウジ虫を始末するには高物すぎる花火ではあるが……
しまつ	始末	n, vs, adj-na	management, dealing with, settlement, cleaning up, disposal,course of events, circumstances, particulars,end result (usu. bad), outcome,economizing, economising, frugality, being thrifty	And such a waste of good fireworks, just to get rid of vermin like you…	そうだな。キミたちウジ虫を始末するには高物すぎる花火ではあるが……
たか	高	n, n-suf	quantity, amount, volume, number, amount of money	And such a waste of good fireworks, just to get rid of vermin like you…	そうだな。キミたちウジ虫を始末するには高物すぎる花火ではあるが……
はなび	花火	n	fireworks	And such a waste of good fireworks, just to get rid of vermin like you…	そうだな。キミたちウジ虫を始末するには高物すぎる花火ではあるが……
こと	事	n, n-suf	thing, matter,incident, occurrence, event, something serious, trouble, crisis,circumstances, situation, state of affairs,work, business, affair,after an inflectable word, creates a noun phrase indicating something the speaker does not feel close to,nominalizing suffix,pretending to ..., playing make-believe ...,alias, aka, nickname, alternative name, also known as	VERMIN!? That's all you can say? VERMIN!?	ウジ虫だと！？言うに事価いて、ウジ虫だと！
おいやる	追いやる	v5r, vt	to drive away, to order off, to chase away,to force into an unpleasant situation (bankruptcy, prostitution, suicide, etc.)	Shinra're the VERMIN for killing the Planet! Guess that'd make you King VERMIN! So shu'up jackass!	キサマら神羅は、この星を死に追いやろうとする寄生虫じゃねぇか！その親玉であるキサマが何をえらそうにホザく！
きせいちゅう	寄生虫	n	parasite	Shinra're the VERMIN for killing the Planet! Guess that'd make you King VERMIN! So shu'up jackass!	キサマら神羅は、この星を死に追いやろうとする寄生虫じゃねぇか！その親玉であるキサマが何をえらそうにホザく！
おやだま	親玉	n	boss, chief, head	Shinra're the VERMIN for killing the Planet! Guess that'd make you King VERMIN! So shu'up jackass!	キサマら神羅は、この星を死に追いやろうとする寄生虫じゃねぇか！その親玉であるキサマが何をえらそうにホザく！
あきる	飽きる	v1, aux-v, vi	to get tired of, to lose interest in, to be fed up with, to have enough	…You are beginning to bore me.	……そろそろキミたちの相手をするのにもあきたよ
わし	和紙	n	washi, Japanese paper	I'm a very busy man, so if you'll excuse me… I have a dinner I must attend.	わしは多忙な身なのでな。もう、失礼させてもらうか。今日は、会食の予定があるものでな
たぼう	多忙	n, adj-na, adj-no	being very busy, busyness	I'm a very busy man, so if you'll excuse me… I have a dinner I must attend.	わしは多忙な身なのでな。もう、失礼させてもらうか。今日は、会食の予定があるものでな
かいしょく	会食	n, vs	dining together, mess	I'm a very busy man, so if you'll excuse me… I have a dinner I must attend.	わしは多忙な身なのでな。もう、失礼させてもらうか。今日は、会食の予定があるものでな
ふざける	巫山戯る	v1, vi	to joke, to jest, to kid, to josh,to make fun of, to laugh at, to play a prank,to romp, to gambol, to frolic, to frisk, to mess around, to fool around, to screw around,to neck, to make out	Dinner!? Don't gimme that! I ain't even started wit' you yet!	会食だと！？　ふざけやがって！おまえには言いたいことがまだまだあるんだ！
まだまだ	未だ未だ	adv	still some way to go before the goal, still more to come, much more, not yet	Dinner!? Don't gimme that! I ain't even started wit' you yet!	会食だと！？　ふざけやがって！おまえには言いたいことがまだまだあるんだ！
あそび	遊び	n, n-suf	playing,play (margin between on and off, gap before pressing button or lever has an effect)	But, I've made arrangements for a playmate for you all.	キミたちの遊び相手は別に用意させてもらった
べつに	別に	adv	(not) particularly, (not) especially, (not) specially,separately, apart, additionally, extra	But, I've made arrangements for a playmate for you all.	キミたちの遊び相手は別に用意させてもらった
ようい	用意	n, vs	preparation, arrangements, provision, getting ready, laying out (e.g. a meal)	But, I've made arrangements for a playmate for you all.	キミたちの遊び相手は別に用意させてもらった
おと	音	n, n-suf	sound, noise, report,note,fame,Chinese-derived character reading	What's that noise?!	！？　何の音？
やしろ	社	n	shrine (usually Shinto)	Meet 'Airbuster', a techno-soldier. Our Weapon Development Department created him.	我が社の兵器開発部が試作した機動兵「エアバスターだ」
へいき	兵器	n	arms, weapon, ordnance	Meet 'Airbuster', a techno-soldier. Our Weapon Development Department created him.	我が社の兵器開発部が試作した機動兵「エアバスターだ」
しさく	試作	n, vs	trial manufacture, experiment, test piece, prototype	Meet 'Airbuster', a techno-soldier. Our Weapon Development Department created him.	我が社の兵器開発部が試作した機動兵「エアバスターだ」
きどう	機動	adj-f	maneuver (usu. of military force), manoeuvre,mobile, nimble, agile, quick to respond	Meet 'Airbuster', a techno-soldier. Our Weapon Development Department created him.	我が社の兵器開発部が試作した機動兵「エアバスターだ」
データ		n	data, datum	I'm sure the data he'll extract from your dead bodies will be of great use to us in future experiments.	君たちとの戦闘データは今後の開発の貴重なサンプルとして利用させてもらうよ
きちょう	貴重	adj-na, n	precious, valuable	I'm sure the data he'll extract from your dead bodies will be of great use to us in future experiments.	君たちとの戦闘データは今後の開発の貴重なサンプルとして利用させてもらうよ
サンプル		n	sample, example, specimen,display model (e.g. plastic food models used by restaurants)	I'm sure the data he'll extract from your dead bodies will be of great use to us in future experiments.	君たちとの戦闘データは今後の開発の貴重なサンプルとして利用させてもらうよ
りよう	利用	n, vs	use, utilization, utilisation, application	I'm sure the data he'll extract from your dead bodies will be of great use to us in future experiments.	君たちとの戦闘データは今後の開発の貴重なサンプルとして利用させてもらうよ
とりあえず	取りあえず	adv	first of all, at once, right away,for now, for the time being	Yo, CLOUD! We've gotta do somethin' 'bout him!	おい、CLOUD！とりあえずコイツをなんとかするぞ！
こえ	声	n	voice,singing (of a bird), chirping (of an insect), hoot,voice, opinion (as expressed in words), view, wish, attitude, will,sound,sense (of something's arrival), feeling,voice, voiced sound	Don't go cryin' like a woman. There ain't nothin' I can do for ya. Ya gotta do it on your own.	情けない声だすんじゃねえよ。悪いが何もしてやれそうにない。自分でなんとかしてくれ