ひざ	膝	n	knee,lap, knee and thigh (while sitting)	Back then… I only got scraped knees…	あの時は……ヒザすりむいただけですんだけど……
すりむく	擦りむく	v5k	to skin (one's knee), to graze, to scratch	Back then… I only got scraped knees…	あの時は……ヒザすりむいただけですんだけど……
うごく	動く	v5k, vi	to move, to stir, to shift, to shake, to swing,to operate, to run, to go, to work,to be touched, to be influenced,to change, to vary, to fluctuate, to waver,certain, factual,to be transferred	Oh! It moved!	あっ！　動いた！
もしも	若しも	adv	if	Hello, hello!	もしも～し！
いだく	抱く	v5k	to embrace, to hold in the arms (e.g. a baby), to hug,to harbour (e.g. grudge), to harbor, to bear, to have (e.g. ambition), to entertain (e.g. hope, suspicion),to have sex with, to make love to, to sleep with,to sit on eggs	You okay?	だいじょぶ？
きょうかい	教会	n	church, congregation	This is a church in the Sector 5 slums.	ここ、スラムの教会。５番街よ
やね	屋根	n	roof	The roof and the flower bed must have broken your fall. You're lucky.	屋根と、花畑、クッションになったのかな。運、いいね
はなばたけ	花畑	n	field of flowers, flower garden, flower bed	The roof and the flower bed must have broken your fall. You're lucky.	屋根と、花畑、クッションになったのかな。運、いいね
クッション		n	cushion	The roof and the flower bed must have broken your fall. You're lucky.	屋根と、花畑、クッションになったのかな。運、いいね
くさ	草	exp	grass, weed, herb, thatch,ninja,not genuine, substandard,laughter, LOL	They say grass and flowers won't grow in Midgar.	ミッドガルって草や花、あまり育たないでしょ？
そだつ	育つ	v5t, vi	to be raised (e.g. child), to be brought up, to grow (up)	They say grass and flowers won't grow in Midgar.	ミッドガルって草や花、あまり育たないでしょ？
しょたいめん	初対面	n	first meeting, first interview with	Never saw you before	（たしか、初対面だ）
よっぱらい	酔っ払い	n	drunkard	You're the slum drunk	スラムの酔っぱらい
いし	意志	n	will, volition, intention, intent, determination	Excuse me, but you're really rude!	しつれいしちゃうわね！
いっか	一家	n	a family, a household, a home, one's family, whole family,(one's own) style, school,gang, (yazuka) family	Well, that's okay.	まぁ、いっか
なんとも	何とも	adv	quite, really, very, extremely,nothing, not a bit, not at all	Nowadays you can find Materia anywhere.	今はマテリアはめずらしくもなんともない
やくにたつ	役に立つ	exp, v5t	to be helpful, to be useful	No, I do… it just doesn't do anything.	そんなこと、ないけど……でも、役に立たなくてもいいの
おかあさん	お母さん	n	mother, mom, mum, ma,wife	I feel safe just having it. It was my mother's.	身につけてると安心できるしお母さんが残してくれた……
おはなし	お話	n	story, tale	Say, I feel like talking. Do you feel up to it?	ね、いろいろ、お話したいんだけどどうかな？
せっかく	折角	adv	with trouble, at great pains,rare, valuable, precious, long-awaited,kind, generous,specially, especially, expressly	After all, here we are meeting again.	せっかく、こうしてまた、会えたんだし……ね？
ていれ	手入れ	n, vs	care, looking after, repair, maintenance, tending, trimming, grooming,(police) raid, crackdown	Wait here. I've got to check my flowers. It'll just be a minute.	じゃ、待ってて。お花の手入れ、すぐ終わるから
げんき	元気	adj-na, n	lively, full of spirit, energetic, vigorous, vital, spirited,healthy, well, fit, in good health	Ahhh. I wonder whose fault that is. It's not easy to grow them, you know. Poor flowers.	あ～あ、誰のせいかな～。せっかく、元気に育ったのにね～。お花さん、かわいそ
たがう	違う	v5u, vi	to differ, to be different,to run counter to,to change (into something out of the ordinary)	We don't know each other's names, do we?	おたがい、名前、知らないね
タイミング		n	timing	Sorry, bad timing on my part.	タイミング、悪いなぁ
ボディーガード		n	bodyguard	Say, CLOUD. Have you ever been a bodyguard?	ねえ、CLOUD。ボディガードも仕事のうち？
つれだす	連れ出す	v5s, vt	to take out	Then, get me out of here. Take me home.	ここから連れ出して。家まで、連れてって
おひきうけ	お引き受け	n	undertaking, underwriting, acceptance	OK… but it'll cost you.	お引き受けしましょう。しかし、安くはない
デート		n, adj-no, vs	date, go on a date	How about if I go out with you once?	デート、１回！
いぬ	犬	n-pref	dog (Canis (lupus) familiaris),snoop (i.e. a detective, a spy, etc.),loser, asshole,counterfeit, inferior, useless, wasteful	Shut up! Shinra spy!	だまれ！　神羅のイヌめ！
レ		unc	re, 2nd note in the tonic solfa representation of the diatonic scale,le, the	Reno! Want him taken out?	レノさん！やっちまいますか？
かんがえ	考え	n	thinking, thought, view, opinion, concept,idea, notion, imagination,intention, plan, design,consideration, judgement, deliberation, reflection,wish, hope, expectation	I haven't decided yet.	考え中だぞ、と
ふむ	踏む	v5m, vt	to step on, to tread on, to trample on,to set foot on (e.g. foreign soil), to stand on, to visit,to experience, to undergo,to follow (rules, principles, etc.), to go through (e.g. formalities), to complete,to estimate, to guess, to judge, to value, to appraise,to rhyme,to succeed to (e.g. the throne)	Don't fight here! You'll ruin the flowers!	ここで戦ってほしくない！お花、ふまないでほしいの！
でぐち	出口	n	exit, gateway, way out, outlet, leak, vent	The exit is back there.	出口、奥にあるから
ぐしゃぐしゃ		adv-to, adv, adj-na, vs	soggy, mushy, crumpled	They're ruined!	花、ぐしゃぐしゃ！
やねうら	屋根裏	n	attic, loft	Church Roof	教会屋根裏
あそこ	彼処	n	there (place physically distant from both speaker and listener), over there, that place, yonder, you-know-where,genitals, private parts, nether regions,that far (something psychologically distant from both speaker and listener), that much, that point	There they are, over there!	いたぞ、あそこだ！
みのがす	見逃す	v5s, vt	to miss, to overlook, to fail to notice,to let pass (a matter), to overlook (e.g. a wrongdoing), to turn a blind eye to,to pass up (e.g. an opportunity),to let (a good ball) go by	I know. Looks like they aren't going to let us go.	わかっている。どうやら見逃すつもりはないようだな
こたえ	答え	n	answer, reply, response, solution	Well we can't let them catch us, can we? Then, there's only one thing left.	つかまるわけにはいかないんだろ？それなら、答えはひとつさ
うけとめる	受け止める	v1, vt	to catch, to stop the blow,to react to, to take (advice, etc.), to accept, to come to grips with	All right. I'll hold them off.	だいじょうぶだ。俺が受け止めてやる
こだい	古代	adj-na, n-adv, n-t	ancient times	The Ancient is getting away! Attack! Attack! > Attack!	古代種が逃げるぞ！撃て、撃て！、撃つな！
たね	種	n	seed (e.g. of a plant), pip, kind, variety, quality, tone,material (e.g. for an article), matter (e.g. of a story), subject, theme, (news) copy,ingredient, leaven (bread), main ingredient of a sushi,cause, source,trick, secret, magician's trick, inside story,paternal blood, lineage,breed (of a stock), sperm, semen	The Ancient is getting away! Attack! Attack! > Attack!	古代種が逃げるぞ！撃て、撃て！、撃つな！
ていこう	抵抗	n	resistance, opposition, standing up to,reluctance, repulsion, repugnance,resistance, drag, friction,electrical resistance,resistor	Think we killed 'em? They never should've fought us!	やっちまったかな、と。抵抗するからだぞ、と
ぶる	振る	v5r	to assume the air of ..., to behave like ...,to put on airs, to be self-important	Urkkk!	ぶべっ！
つかまえる	捕まえる	v1, vt	to catch, to arrest, to seize	The Ancient! We got her!	古代種！捕まえたぞ！
こわれる	壊れる	v1, vi	to be broken, to break,to fall through, to come to nothing	We'll get out through the hole in the roof.	そこの屋根の壊れたところから外に出ましょう
たおれる	倒れる	v1, vi	to fall (over, down), to collapse, to take a fall, to topple,to be destroyed (in a collapse), to collapse, to cave in, to crumble, to give away,to be confined to bed (with an illness), to come down with, to break down (e.g. from overwork),to die, to be killed,to go bankrupt (of a company, bank, etc.), to fail, to collapse, to go under,to be defeated (in a game), to lose,to fall (of a government, dictator, etc.), to be overthrown	Jump off that beam, and we should be able to make it through to the roof.	倒れたハリ、つたって行けば屋根の上、出られるから
はり	針	ctr, n-suf	needle, pin,hook,stinger, thorn,hand (e.g. clock, etc.), pointer,staple (for a stapler),needlework, sewing,malice,counter for stitches	Jump off that beam, and we should be able to make it through to the roof.	倒れたハリ、つたって行けば屋根の上、出られるから
つたう	伝う	v5u, vi	to go along, to walk along, to follow	Jump off that beam, and we should be able to make it through to the roof.	倒れたハリ、つたって行けば屋根の上、出られるから
じんざい	人材	n, adj-no	capable person, talented person,human resources, personnel	The Turks are a Shinra organization. They scout for possible candidates for SOLDIER.	タークスは神羅の組織。ソルジャーの人材をみつけだしスカウトするのが役目だ
みつけだす	見付け出す	v5s, vt	to find out, to discover, to locate	The Turks are a Shinra organization. They scout for possible candidates for SOLDIER.	タークスは神羅の組織。ソルジャーの人材をみつけだしスカウトするのが役目だ
スカウト		n, vs	scout	The Turks are a Shinra organization. They scout for possible candidates for SOLDIER.	タークスは神羅の組織。ソルジャーの人材をみつけだしスカウトするのが役目だ
やくめ	役目	n	duty, role, function	The Turks are a Shinra organization. They scout for possible candidates for SOLDIER.	タークスは神羅の組織。ソルジャーの人材をみつけだしスカウトするのが役目だ
らんぼう	乱暴	n, vs	violence, assault, running riot,rough (e.g. handling), reckless, careless, coarse, rude, unreasonable (e.g. demand), wild (e.g. argument),rape, sexual assault	This violently? I thought they were kidnapping someone.	こんなに乱暴なやりかたで？まるで人さらいみたい
まるで	丸で	adv	quite, entirely, completely, at all,as if, as though, just like	This violently? I thought they were kidnapping someone.	こんなに乱暴なやりかたで？まるで人さらいみたい
ひとさらい	人さらい	n	kidnapping, kidnaping, abduction,kidnapper, kidnaper, abductor	This violently? I thought they were kidnapping someone.	こんなに乱暴なやりかたで？まるで人さらいみたい
うら	浦	n	inlet,seashore, beach	They're also involved in a lot of other dirty stuff on the side.	それにウラじゃ汚いことをやっている
ころし	殺し	n	murder, killing, murderer	Spying, murder…you know.	スパイ、殺し屋……いろいろだ
いや	嫌	adj-na, n	disagreeable, detestable, unpleasant, reluctant	I don't know… But I don't want to get caught by THOSE people!	どうかな～。でも、あんなヤツらにつかまるのはイヤ！
ひとり	一人	n	one person,alone, unmarried, solitary	Slow…down… Don't leave me…	ひとりで……さきに……行っちゃうんだもん……
いじわる	意地悪	adj-na, n, vs	malicious, ill-tempered, unkind	Oh! You're terrible!	もう！　いじわる！
あかし	証	n	proof, evidence, sign, testimony, vindication,certificate, license, membership card,to testify (usu. Christian religious context),enlightenment,symptoms (in Chinese medicine), patient's condition	That's the sign of those who have been infused with Mako… A mark of SOLDIER.	そう、これは魔晄を浴びた者……ソルジャーのあかし
やっと		adv	at last, at length,barely, narrowly, just, by the skin of one's teeth	Whew! Finally made it off! Now what?	フ～！　やっとおりられた！さて、と……
つうじる	通じる	v1, vi	to be open (to traffic), to lead to, to communicate (with),to flow (liquid, current), to pass, to get through to,to be understood, to be comprehended,to be honored, to be good,to be well versed in, to be well-informed,to communicate clandestinely, to keep in touch (e.g. with the enemy),to form a liaison, to be intimate,to spread widely, to disseminate	The Sector 5 and Sector 6 slums are right ahead…	この先は５番街スラムと６番街スラムにつうじてんだが……
たいして	大して	adv	(not so) much, (not) very	No thrills, no danger. But there are a few stores so if there's something you want, stop by.	たいしてスリルもねえが、危険もねえ。店だけはあるから何かほしけりゃよってみな
スリル		n	thrill	No thrills, no danger. But there are a few stores so if there's something you want, stop by.	たいしてスリルもねえが、危険もねえ。店だけはあるから何かほしけりゃよってみな
きけん	危険	n, adj-na	danger, peril, hazard,risk	No thrills, no danger. But there are a few stores so if there's something you want, stop by.	たいしてスリルもねえが、危険もねえ。店だけはあるから何かほしけりゃよってみな
パラダイス		n	paradise	Sector 6 slum…heh heh heh, A man's paradise. I've always wanted to go.	６番街スラムか……ヘヘヘ、男にとっちゃパラダイス、１度は行ってみるといい
おこなう	行う	v5u, vt	to perform, to do, to conduct oneself, to carry out	Sector 6 slum…heh heh heh, A man's paradise. I've always wanted to go.	６番街スラムか……ヘヘヘ、男にとっちゃパラダイス、１度は行ってみるといい
おじょうさん	お嬢さん	n	(another's) daughter,young lady	…But not for a nice girl like you… But there may be something else good for you. Heh, heh, heh.	……ってことは、あんたみたいなおじょうさんには……ってとこさ。ま、別のお楽しみもあるかもな。ククク……
べつ	別	n-suf	distinction, difference, discrimination,separate, different, another, extra,exception, exclusion,classified by, ranked by, according to	…But not for a nice girl like you… But there may be something else good for you. Heh, heh, heh.	……ってことは、あんたみたいなおじょうさんには……ってとこさ。ま、別のお楽しみもあるかもな。ククク……
ちっと	些と	adv	a little bit,a little while	Yeah, but it's a little dangerous over there, you know.	だがな、あそこはちっとばかしヤバイぜ。なんたって……
おおう	覆う	v5u, vt	to cover, to hide, to conceal, to wrap, to disguise	That's all I got to say. If you want to know more, you'll have to go there yourself. But you can't just waltz over there anytime you feel like it.	おおっと、これ以上は言えねえ。知りたければ自分で行ってみることだ。もっとも、いつでも行けるわけじゃないんだが……
たのしめる	楽しめる	v1	to be able to enjoy	HEY! Looks like they were in Sector 6. Have fun?	ヨオ！　６番街にいったようだな。どうだ、楽しめたか？
さいきん	最近	adj-no	recently, lately, these days, nowadays, right now,nearest, closest	That reminds me, you don't hear much about Corneo lately. Wonder what happened to him?	そういや最近コルネオのウワサをきかねえな。なんかあったのか？
コル		n	col	That reminds me, you don't hear much about Corneo lately. Wonder what happened to him?	そういや最近コルネオのウワサをきかねえな。なんかあったのか？
ネオ		n, pref	neo	That reminds me, you don't hear much about Corneo lately. Wonder what happened to him?	そういや最近コルネオのウワサをきかねえな。なんかあったのか？
うみ	海	n	sea, ocean, waters	I saw her! I really did!	ワ、ワタシは見た！見たんです！
し	市	n, n-suf	city	I saw her! I really did!	ワ、ワタシは見た！見たんです！
いくら	幾ら	adv	how much?, how many?,even, even if	I waited around a long time, but she never came out again!	しかも、いくら待ってもその女は２度と出てこないじゃありませんか！
ゆるがす	揺るがす	v5s, vt	to shake, to swing, to sway, to shock	Then with a big rumble, the sector 7 plate came crashing down on the slum.	大地をゆるがす音とともに、７番街スラムの上にプレートが！
きょだい	巨大	adj-na, n	huge, gigantic, enormous	A really weird guy lives inside of some Huge Materia! And then there were 9 little devils! Ohh…shiver…shake…	巨大なマテリアの中に眠る不気味な男！そして９匹の悪魔たち……！ブルブルブル……
ぶきみ	不気味	adj-na, n	weird, ominous, eerie, uncanny, ghastly	A really weird guy lives inside of some Huge Materia! And then there were 9 little devils! Ohh…shiver…shake…	巨大なマテリアの中に眠る不気味な男！そして９匹の悪魔たち……！ブルブルブル……
ひき	匹	n	counter for small animals,counter for rolls of cloth (two han in size),counter for horses,roll of cloth	A really weird guy lives inside of some Huge Materia! And then there were 9 little devils! Ohh…shiver…shake…	巨大なマテリアの中に眠る不気味な男！そして９匹の悪魔たち……！ブルブルブル……
あくま	悪魔	n	devil, demon, fiend,Satan, the Devil,Māra, [object Object]	A really weird guy lives inside of some Huge Materia! And then there were 9 little devils! Ohh…shiver…shake…	巨大なマテリアの中に眠る不気味な男！そして９匹の悪魔たち……！ブルブルブル……
さいき	再起	n, vs, adj-no	comeback, recovery, restoration, rally, reflexive (in grammar)	All right. It was a lie. I just made it up because nothing's been happening around here lately.	すみません、ウソでした。さいきんスゴイものを見ていないのでつい……
つい		adv	just (now),quite (near),unintentionally, unconsciously, by mistake, against one's better judgement (judgment)	All right. It was a lie. I just made it up because nothing's been happening around here lately.	すみません、ウソでした。さいきんスゴイものを見ていないのでつい……
びょうき	病気	n, adj-no, vs	illness, disease, sickness	This guy are sick.	ここの人、病気みたいなの
ちかく	近く	adv	near, neighbourhood, neighborhood, vicinity,nearly (e.g. "it took nearly one year"), close to,shortly, soon	He passed out nearby and someone must have helped him here.	近くで倒れていたのを誰かが助けたんだって
どかん	土管	n	earthen pipe	That guy in the pipe's a weird one. No matter what you ask him, he only answers 'uuh' or 'aahh'.	へんなんだよね、このドカンの中の人。何をきいても、ああとかううしか言わないんだよね
いしゃ	医者	n	(medical) doctor, physician	Listen, I'm no doctor.	悪いが俺は医者じゃない
かね	金	n	money,metal	Hey…that man has a tattoo. I think it's the number 2.	あら？　この人、イレズミしてる。数字の２、かな----
よっぽど	余っ程	adv	very, greatly, much, to a large extent, quite,just about to	Even with all that commotion, you went on like nothing happened. You must've really been through the mill to get like that.	あんな大きな音がしたってのにここの人、あいかわらずなんだよね。よっぽどつらいことでもあったみたいなんだよね……
しあわせ	幸せ	adj-na, n	happiness, good fortune, luck, blessing	I don't know, they might even be better off this way.	こうなっちゃ、ここの人の方が幸せかも知れないよね
ちかづく	近づく	v5k, vi	to approach, to draw near, to get close,to get acquainted with, to get closer to, to get to know	Even though they know the planet is on its last legs, there's nothing they can do about it.	この星の終わりがジワジワ近づいてくるのを知りながら何もできないなんてさ
とざす	閉ざす	v5s, vt	to shut, to close, to lock, to fasten,to block (e.g. the way), to shut off, to shut in,to plunge (in grief)	I wish I could close myself off like that.	私も、心を閉ざしてしまいたいよね……
ふらふら		adv, adv-to, vs	unsteadily (e.g. on one's feet), shakily, staggering, reeling, tottering, dizzily,wandering, wavering, aimlessly, without knowing what one is doing, having no goal in mind	These folks went wobbling off somewhere…	ここの人、どっかへ行っちゃったんだよね。フラフラ～っと……
ばりばり		adj-na, adv, n	tearing, ripping, scratching,crunching, munching,stiff, starchy, crisp,(working) hard, actively, vigorously, energetically,making loud noises in succession (firing bullets, vehicle revving up, etc.),crackling (electricity)	First there was a rumbling… …then cracking… and then ker-blaMM!!…	ゴゴゴゴ……ってなったらバリバリバリっときてドドドドドーン！！て……
にょう	尿	n	urine	First there was a rumbling… …then cracking… and then ker-blaMM!!…	ゴゴゴゴ……ってなったらバリバリバリっときてドドドドドーン！！て……
そこそこ		suf	reasonably, fairly, all right, moderate,hurriedly, in a rush, having barely finished,approximately, about, or so	You finally think you're making a living in the pits of Midgar, and then a big piece of scrap like that falls down here…what's next?	ミッドガルの下にいりゃそこそこのくらしができると思ってたのに、まさかあのデッカイやつが落ちてくるとは……
くらし	暮らし	n, n-suf	life, living, livelihood, life circumstances	You finally think you're making a living in the pits of Midgar, and then a big piece of scrap like that falls down here…what's next?	ミッドガルの下にいりゃそこそこのくらしができると思ってたのに、まさかあのデッカイやつが落ちてくるとは……
ウォール		n	wall	You ever hear of Wall Market?	ウォールマーケットって知ってっかい？
マーケット		n	market	You ever hear of Wall Market?	ウォールマーケットって知ってっかい？
なんでも	何でも	exp	any, whatever one likes, by all means, anything, everything,I am told, I understand, they say, I hear	It's a market in the slums of Sector 6. They've got everything you could ever want there.	６番街スラムにあるマーケットさ。あそこに行けば何でもそろうんだけど途中の道がね……
そろう	揃う	v5u, vi	to be complete, to be all present, to make a full set, to be satisfied (of conditions),to be equal, to be uniform, to be even, to match, to agree,to gather, to assemble, to be collected	It's a market in the slums of Sector 6. They've got everything you could ever want there.	６番街スラムにあるマーケットさ。あそこに行けば何でもそろうんだけど途中の道がね……
とちゅう	途中	n-adv, n-t	on the way, en route,in the middle of, midway	It's a market in the slums of Sector 6. They've got everything you could ever want there.	６番街スラムにあるマーケットさ。あそこに行けば何でもそろうんだけど途中の道がね……
みち	道	n	road, path, street, lane, passage,route, way,distance, journey,road (e.g. to victory), course,way (of living, proper conduct, etc.), moral principles,teachings (esp. Confucian or Buddhist), dogma,field (e.g. of medicine), subject, speciality,means, way, method	It's a market in the slums of Sector 6. They've got everything you could ever want there.	６番街スラムにあるマーケットさ。あそこに行けば何でもそろうんだけど途中の道がね……
かいもの	買い物	n	shopping, purchased goods	Oh yeah? Then maybe I should have you pick something up for me next time you're there…	へえ、そうかい。なら、そのうちオレの買い物もたのもうか……
とどのつまり	鯔のつまり	exp, adv	in the end, after all is said and done, [object Object]	What's going on with the world? When it's all said and done, we're all gonna wind up dead.	何がどうなってるんだ！と、とどのつまりおれたちゃもうオシマイってことなのかい！？
おれる	折れる	v1, vi	to break, to be broken, to snap, to fracture,to be folded,to give in, to back down, to yield, to submit,to turn (a corner)	What's going on with the world? When it's all said and done, we're all gonna wind up dead.	何がどうなってるんだ！と、とどのつまりおれたちゃもうオシマイってことなのかい！？
おし	押し	n	push, pressure, authority, audacity	What's going on with the world? When it's all said and done, we're all gonna wind up dead.	何がどうなってるんだ！と、とどのつまりおれたちゃもうオシマイってことなのかい！？
まい	舞	n	dancing, dance	What's going on with the world? When it's all said and done, we're all gonna wind up dead.	何がどうなってるんだ！と、とどのつまりおれたちゃもうオシマイってことなのかい！？
つよがる	強がる	v5r, vi	to pretend to be tough, to put on a brave front, to whistle in the dark, to bluff	Maybe not. I'm just flapping my gums. I really wonder how things will turn out.	なーんてね。そんな強がり言ってる場合じゃないのよね……いったいどうなっちゃうのかな
じろじろ		adv, adv-to	staringly, scrutinizing, scrutinising	Hmmm,… …hmph…we only trade items for gil here.	……ジロジロ…………フン、アイテムは金と引き換えだよ
ひきかえ	引き換え	n	exchange, conversion	Hmmm,… …hmph…we only trade items for gil here.	……ジロジロ…………フン、アイテムは金と引き換えだよ
にげだす	逃げ出す	v5s	to run away, to flee, to make off, to take to one's heels, to escape,to start to run away	Well, how about some Materia? I gotta make some money and get out of here!	さ、マテリア買ってくれマテリア！金をつくってここから逃げ出すんだ！
おかね	お金	n	money	And I just got together enough money to get out of this place…	せっかくここから逃げ出すお金ができたのに……
たにん	他人	n	another person, other people, others,unrelated person (i.e. not related by blood),outsider, stranger	Hey, didn't your mother ever teach you not to barge into houses and open up people's freezers?	ひとんちのフリーザーを勝手に開けるなって、おっかさんに言われなかったかい？
フリーザー		n	freezer, refrigerator	Hey, didn't your mother ever teach you not to barge into houses and open up people's freezers?	ひとんちのフリーザーを勝手に開けるなって、おっかさんに言われなかったかい？
おっかさん	御っ母さん	n	mother, mom, mum, mama	Hey, didn't your mother ever teach you not to barge into houses and open up people's freezers?	ひとんちのフリーザーを勝手に開けるなって、おっかさんに言われなかったかい？
たより	頼り	n	reliance, dependence	So you'd better have a weapon you can depend on! Am I right?	こんな世の中だからこそ、やっぱり頼りになるのは強え武器！だろ？
あちら	彼方	pn	that way (direction distant from both speaker and listener), over there, yonder,that one (something physically distant from both speaker and listener, or something not visible but known by both speaker and listener), that,that person (someone physically distant from both speaker and listener, or someone not present but known by both speaker and listener),there (place distant from both speaker and listener), over there, foreign country (esp. a Western nation)	…the weapon store's over that way.	店はあっち、向こうだからな
むこう	向こう	n	opposite side, other side, opposite direction,over there, that way, far away, beyond,the other party, the other person,future (starting now)	…the weapon store's over that way.	店はあっち、向こうだからな
ふり	降り	n	rainfall, snowfall,alighting, descending	Any passengers getting off at Midgar should please ring.	お降りのお客様はブザーをならしてくださ～い！
おきゃくさま	お客様	n	guest, visitor,customer, client, shopper, spectator, audience, tourist, sightseer, passenger	Any passengers getting off at Midgar should please ring.	お降りのお客様はブザーをならしてくださ～い！
ブザー		n	buzzer, personal alarm (loud buzzer to attract attention in case of attack)	Any passengers getting off at Midgar should please ring.	お降りのお客様はブザーをならしてくださ～い！
ならす	慣らす	v5s, vt	to accustom, to train (e.g. one's ear),to tame, to domesticate, to train (an animal)	Any passengers getting off at Midgar should please ring.	お降りのお客様はブザーをならしてくださ～い！
くだす	下す	aux-v, v5s	to make a decision, to draw a conclusion,to give a judgement, to hand down a verdict, to pass a sentence, to give an order,to let go down, to lower,to do oneself, to do by oneself,to beat, to defeat,to have loose bowels, to have diarrhea,to pass (in stool), to discharge from the body,to do in one go, to do to the end without stopping	Any passengers getting off at Midgar should please ring.	お降りのお客様はブザーをならしてくださ～い！
きらきら		adv, adv-to, vs	glittering, sparkling, glistening, twinkling	You know, Midgar's supposed to be sparkly 'n' springy 'n' sleeky.	ミッドガルってさあ。キラキラでグイーングイーンでシャキーンシャキーンなんだって
みんか	民家	n	private house	House 1f.	民家１階
ダミー		n	dummy	Uh, test, test… This is a dummy message. A test. Is it coming through?	あ～テステス……これはダミーのメッセージテストってヤツだな。ちゃんとでてるかい？
テスト		n, vs	test	Uh, test, test… This is a dummy message. A test. Is it coming through?	あ～テステス……これはダミーのメッセージテストってヤツだな。ちゃんとでてるかい？
アバンチュール		n	amorous adventure, love affair	But you can't trust that AVALANCHE, or whatever you call them.	だがな、アバランチだかアバンチュールだか知らねえがあいつらも信用ならねえ
けっきょ	穴居	n, vs, adj-no	cave dwelling, troglodytism	You can bat it around all you like, but it all comes down to wanting to live like the people up there.	アレコレ言っててもけっきょく上の連中がうらやましいだけなのさ
れんちゅう	連中	n	company, lot, bunch, gang, pack, those guys, group,troupe, company (of musicians)	You can bat it around all you like, but it all comes down to wanting to live like the people up there.	アレコレ言っててもけっきょく上の連中がうらやましいだけなのさ
しんじる	信じる	v1, vt	to believe, to believe in, to place trust in, to confide in, to have faith in	So who do I believe in? Myself! Me! I never lie to myself, that's for sure!	なら誰を信じるか？決まってんじゃねえか、俺だよ俺！俺は俺にウソをつかねえからな
きまる	決まる	v5r, vi	to be decided, to be settled,to look good in (clothes)	So who do I believe in? Myself! Me! I never lie to myself, that's for sure!	なら誰を信じるか？決まってんじゃねえか、俺だよ俺！俺は俺にウソをつかねえからな
しゃちょう	社長	n	company president, manager, director	And what's with the new president of Shinra, Inc.?	今度の神羅カンパニーの社長ありゃ何だ！？
ランチ		n	lunch,(Western-style) single-plate lunch set, plate lunch, lunch set,launch (boat), motorboat,ranch	The hell's up with that!? I don't care if they're AVALANCHE or Avant-garde or whatever. Anyone who'd bring the plates down on us is nuts!!	何てこったい……！アバランチだかＢランチだか知らねえが、プレートごと落っことすなんてどうかしてるぜ！！
おつ	落つ	v2t-k, vi	to fall down, to drop, to fall (e.g. rain), to sink (e.g. sun or moon), to fall onto (e.g. light or one's gaze),to be omitted, to be missing,to crash, to degenerate, to degrade, to fall behind,to be removed (e.g. illness, possessing spirit, name on a list),to fall (into someone's hands), to become someone's possession,to fall, to be defeated, to surrender	The hell's up with that!? I don't care if they're AVALANCHE or Avant-garde or whatever. Anyone who'd bring the plates down on us is nuts!!	何てこったい……！アバランチだかＢランチだか知らねえが、プレートごと落っことすなんてどうかしてるぜ！！
どうか		adv, n	please, somehow or other	The hell's up with that!? I don't care if they're AVALANCHE or Avant-garde or whatever. Anyone who'd bring the plates down on us is nuts!!	何てこったい……！アバランチだかＢランチだか知らねえが、プレートごと落っことすなんてどうかしてるぜ！！
ほんもの	本物	n, adj-no	genuine article, real thing, real deal	Damn! If they're really from SOLDIER, they should be doing something about all this!!	チクショウ！本物のソルジャーなら何とかしてくれるのに！！
ドライブ		n	drive, trip by car, driving,to (go for a) drive, to go on a trip by car,to drive (e.g. a car),to drive (innovation, change, etc.), to propel,drive	Me and my woman were going for a drive. Or at least we were supposed to until I had engine trouble and our plans fizzled.	今日はカノジョと楽しいドライブ。……のはずが、突然のエンジントラブルでデートはだいなし！
エンジン		n	engine	Me and my woman were going for a drive. Or at least we were supposed to until I had engine trouble and our plans fizzled.	今日はカノジョと楽しいドライブ。……のはずが、突然のエンジントラブルでデートはだいなし！
トラブル		n	trouble	Me and my woman were going for a drive. Or at least we were supposed to until I had engine trouble and our plans fizzled.	今日はカノジョと楽しいドライブ。……のはずが、突然のエンジントラブルでデートはだいなし！
ノー		n-pref	no,no, without, not needed, not allowed	Have you ever had that happen? I hate it when that happens!	そんな経験はございませんか？もうそんな心配はノー！
はつばい	発売	n, vs	sale, offering for sale, release (for sale), launch (product)	A new standard in engines… the 'Shinra V-3000'. For the best drive of your car's life!	新発売のニュータイプエンジンシンラＶー３０００ですばらしいカーライフを！
カー		n	car	A new standard in engines… the 'Shinra V-3000'. For the best drive of your car's life!	新発売のニュータイプエンジンシンラＶー３０００ですばらしいカーライフを！
ライフ		n	life	A new standard in engines… the 'Shinra V-3000'. For the best drive of your car's life!	新発売のニュータイプエンジンシンラＶー３０００ですばらしいカーライフを！
こうさく	工作	n, vs	handicraft,work, construction, manufacturing,maneuvering, manoeuvering	A terrorist attack by the group called AVALANCHE has parts of Midgar temporarily out of power, but they will be restored momentarily.	テロリストグループ　アバランチの破壊工作により、一部供給が中断していたミッドガルの電力はまもなく回復する予定です
いちぶ	一部	n-adv, n	one part, one portion, one section, some,one copy (e.g. of a document)	A terrorist attack by the group called AVALANCHE has parts of Midgar temporarily out of power, but they will be restored momentarily.	テロリストグループ　アバランチの破壊工作により、一部供給が中断していたミッドガルの電力はまもなく回復する予定です
ちゅうだん	中断	n, vs	interruption, suspension, break	A terrorist attack by the group called AVALANCHE has parts of Midgar temporarily out of power, but they will be restored momentarily.	テロリストグループ　アバランチの破壊工作により、一部供給が中断していたミッドガルの電力はまもなく回復する予定です
まもなく	間もなく	adv	soon, before long, in a short time,lacking time to ..., without time to ...	A terrorist attack by the group called AVALANCHE has parts of Midgar temporarily out of power, but they will be restored momentarily.	テロリストグループ　アバランチの破壊工作により、一部供給が中断していたミッドガルの電力はまもなく回復する予定です
ドミノ		n	domino	Following President Shinra's address, Mayor Domino also spoke out today against AVALANCHE.	プレジデント神羅につづきミッドガルのドミノ市長もアバランチ　に対する非難声明をだしています……
しちょう	市長	n, adj-no	mayor	Following President Shinra's address, Mayor Domino also spoke out today against AVALANCHE.	プレジデント神羅につづきミッドガルのドミノ市長もアバランチ　に対する非難声明をだしています……
ひなん	非難	n, vs, adj-na	criticism, blame, censure, attack, reproach	Following President Shinra's address, Mayor Domino also spoke out today against AVALANCHE.	プレジデント神羅につづきミッドガルのドミノ市長もアバランチ　に対する非難声明をだしています……
てんき	天気	n	weather, the elements,fair weather, fine weather	Now for the weather.	天気予報をおおくりします
よほう	予報	n, vs	forecast, prediction	Now for the weather.	天気予報をおおくりします
おくる	送る	v5r, vt	to send (a thing), to dispatch, to despatch, to transmit,to take or escort (a person somewhere), to see off (a person),to bid farewell (to the departed), to bury,to spend (time), to live one's life,to pass (down the line),to affix okurigana	Now for the weather.	天気予報をおおくりします
どんより		adv, adv-to, vs	dark, gloomy, overcast, gray,heavy, leaden, dull, lackluster, glazed	Tomorrow's weather will be overcast most of the day, with a slight chance of showers in parts of the city.	明日のミッドガルはどんよりとしたくもりぞらの１日になるでしょう
もる	盛る	v5r, vt	to serve (in a bowl, on a plate, etc.), to dish out, to dish up, to fill (a bowl) with,to pile up, to heap up, to fill up, to stack up,to administer (medicine, poison), to dose out, to prescribe,to put into (e.g. information in a report, meaning in a statement),to mark out (e.g. scale), to graduate (e.g. thermometer),to exaggerate, to apply heavy makeup	Tomorrow's weather will be overcast most of the day, with a slight chance of showers in parts of the city.	明日のミッドガルはどんよりとしたくもりぞらの１日になるでしょう
げんいん	原因	n, vs	cause, origin, source	The cause of the accident is still unclear at this time, however, according to some sources it is believed to have something to do with the terrorist group, AVALANCHE.	事故の原因はなお不明ですが関係者によると、カンパニーに対する破壊活動で手配されているテロ組織　アバランチ　による犯行声明が出されたとの情報もあり、現在その……
ふめい	不明	n	unclear, obscure, indistinct, uncertain, ambiguous,unknown, unidentified,ignorance, lack of wisdom, lack of insight	The cause of the accident is still unclear at this time, however, according to some sources it is believed to have something to do with the terrorist group, AVALANCHE.	事故の原因はなお不明ですが関係者によると、カンパニーに対する破壊活動で手配されているテロ組織　アバランチ　による犯行声明が出されたとの情報もあり、現在その……
てはい	手配	n, vs	arrangement, preparations,search (by police)	The cause of the accident is still unclear at this time, however, according to some sources it is believed to have something to do with the terrorist group, AVALANCHE.	事故の原因はなお不明ですが関係者によると、カンパニーに対する破壊活動で手配されているテロ組織　アバランチ　による犯行声明が出されたとの情報もあり、現在その……
みんしゅう	民衆	n, adj-no	people, populace, masses	Citizens, unite! Come to the light, Mako energy.	集え、民衆よ！魔晄の光のもとへ！！
しんり	真理	n, adj-no	truth	Power is Truth Shinra is the future. Real happiness can be found in obedience to the company!	力こそ真理神羅こそ未来！カンパニーにしたがうことこそしょくんの幸福である！
したがう	従う	v5u, vi	to obey (an order, law, etc.), to abide by (a rule, custom, etc.), to follow, to observe, to conform to, to yield to,to follow (a person), to accompany, to go with,to go alongside (e.g. a river), to follow (e.g. a sign),to serve (as), to engage in (work)	Power is Truth Shinra is the future. Real happiness can be found in obedience to the company!	力こそ真理神羅こそ未来！カンパニーにしたがうことこそしょくんの幸福である！
しょ	書	n	book, document,calligraphy (esp. Chinese), penmanship,handwriting,letter, note	Power is Truth Shinra is the future. Real happiness can be found in obedience to the company!	力こそ真理神羅こそ未来！カンパニーにしたがうことこそしょくんの幸福である！
くん	君	n, suf	Mr (junior), master, boy	Power is Truth Shinra is the future. Real happiness can be found in obedience to the company!	力こそ真理神羅こそ未来！カンパニーにしたがうことこそしょくんの幸福である！
こうふく	幸福	n, adj-na	happiness, well-being, joy, welfare, blessedness	Power is Truth Shinra is the future. Real happiness can be found in obedience to the company!	力こそ真理神羅こそ未来！カンパニーにしたがうことこそしょくんの幸福である！
が	蛾	n	moth	……ga…… g, ga ga………………	……ガー……ガ、ガガー……
グーグー		adv, adv-to, vs	snoring,growling (low rumbling sound)	glug…glug…	グーグー……
みつ	蜜	n	nectar,honey,honeydew,treacle, molasses,sorbitol (when visible as dark patches inside an apple)	Now…no one… will find it…num…	……これで……だれにも……みつからムニャムニャ……
ばんめ	番目	n	indicates position in a sequence,divisions of a kabuki performance	Top drawer… and the bottom one…	１番上と……２番目の……
からっぽ	空っぽ	adj-no, adj-na, n	empty, vacant, hollow	Empty…….	からっぽ、か……
ぬすむ	盗む	v5m, vt	to steal	Take it	ぬすむ
こつこつ		adv-to, adv	unflaggingly, steadily, untiringly, laboriously,knocking, tapping, clicking, drumming	Heh heh! I bought an item with the money I'd saved.	ヘヘーン！コツコツためたヘソクリでアイテムをしいれたんだ！
ためる	溜める	v1, vt	to amass, to accumulate, to store,to leave unpaid	Heh heh! I bought an item with the money I'd saved.	ヘヘーン！コツコツためたヘソクリでアイテムをしいれたんだ！
しいれる	仕入れる	v1, vt	to lay in stock, to replenish stock, to procure,to learn, to find out, to take in	Heh heh! I bought an item with the money I'd saved.	ヘヘーン！コツコツためたヘソクリでアイテムをしいれたんだ！
すげる	挿げる	v1, vt	to tie, to fix, to attach	My dream is to grow up and become a big time dealer on Wall Market.	ウォールマーケットですげぇディーラーになるのがおれのユメなんだぜ！
ディーラー		n	dealer	My dream is to grow up and become a big time dealer on Wall Market.	ウォールマーケットですげぇディーラーになるのがおれのユメなんだぜ！
ターボ		n	turbo	Received "Turbo Ether"!	エーテルターボを手にいれた！
みせる	見せる	v1, vt	to show, to display	Oh yeah? Fine! But don't come crawlin' back here askin' to see it again, 'cause it ain't gonna happen!	あっそ！ならいいよ、あとでたのんでも見せてやらないからな！
ビクビク		adv-to, adv, vs, adj-no	being afraid of, being fearful, being timid, being nervous,trembling, shivering	To be a real man you gotta not fart around, but let everyone know where you stand right off!	な、何があってもビクビクしねえでこう、ドーンとかまえてんのがお、男ってもんだ！
かまえる	構える	v1, vt	to set up (a house, store, etc.), to build, to establish, to run, to maintain,to have at the ready (e.g. a gun), to hold in preparation (e.g. a camera), to prepare in advance (e.g. a meal),to adopt a posture, to assume a stance, to stand ready, to be poised for,to put on an air, to assume an attitude,to stiffen, to tense up, to become formal,to fabricate in order to deceive, to make up, to feign,to plan, to scheme	To be a real man you gotta not fart around, but let everyone know where you stand right off!	な、何があってもビクビクしねえでこう、ドーンとかまえてんのがお、男ってもんだ！
かめ	亀	n	tortoise, turtle,heavy drinker,turtle crest, turtle mon	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
どうらく	道楽	n, vs, adj-na	pastime, hobby, favorite amusement,dissipation, debauchery, loose living, prodigality, indulging in alcohol, women, gambling, etc., profligacy	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
つうしん	通信	n, vs	correspondence, communication, transmission, news, signal, telecommunications	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
ナンバー		n	number,number plate, license plate	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
ひととき	一時	n-t, n-adv	moment, a (short) time, a while,former times,two-hour period	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
ぜひ	是非	adv, n	certainly, without fail,right and wrong, pros and cons	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
いちど	一度	n-adv	once, one time, on one occasion,temporarily, for a moment,one degree, one tone, one musical interval	Turtle Paradise News No.1 For delicious wine with a nice zing to it…….	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー１おいしいお酒ですてきなひととき……ぜひいちど
いざかや	居酒屋	n	izakaya, [object Object]	Stop by the "Turtle's Paradise"!!	居酒屋かめ道楽へ！！
かり	仮	adj-no	temporary, provisional, interim,fictitious, assumed (name), alias,hypothetical, theoretical	Temporary stopper	仮のストッパー
ストッパー		n	stopper	Temporary stopper	仮のストッパー
じゅうがつ	十月	n-adv	October	October 7th	１０月７日～
かわいがる	可愛がる	v5r, vt	to love, to cherish, to be affectionate to, to treat tenderly, to dote on,to show favouritism to, to be partial to,to fondle, to caress, to pet,to be tough on, to be rough with, to torment, to train harshly	Will you take good care of my flowers, for me?	お花、かわいがってあげてね
エル		n	ell (unit of length, approx. 45 inches)	Elmyra	エルミナ
ねらう	狙う	v5u, vt	to aim at,to be after (something), to have an eye on	Bodyguard? You were followed again!?	ボディーガードって……おまえ、また狙われたのかい！？
むきになる	向きになる	exp, v5r	to become serious, to take something seriously (joke, teasing), to become irritated or angry (usu. at something trivial), to get worked up	You don't have to get THAT upset…	そ～んなにムキにならなくてもいいと思うけど
あんない	案内	n, vs	guidance, leading (the way), showing around,information, notice, notification,announcement (of one's arrival),invitation,acquaintance, knowledge	Let's see, Sector 7? I'll show you the way.	７番街だったわね。私が案内してあげる
かりる	借りる	v1, vt	to borrow, to have a loan,to rent, to hire	Well, I don't know… getting help from a girl…	……まあ、そうだとしても女の力をかりるなんて…
いいかた	言い方	n	way of talking, speaking style	You expect me to just sit by quietly after hearing you say something like that!?	そういう言い方されてだまってるわけにはいかないわね
かなり	可也	adj-no, adj-na, adv	considerably, fairly, quite	…seem pretty tired…	……かなり、アレだな。つかれてるみたいだぞ
キッチン		n	kitchen,chitin	I haven't slept in a bed like this …for a long time.	こんなキチンとしたベッド……ひさしぶりだ
いらい	以来	n-adv, n-t	since, henceforth	Ever since then.	あれ以来、かな
おんなのこ	女の子	exp, n	girl, daughter,young woman	I'll bet the girls never leave you alone.	そんなんじゃ、あれだね。女の子もほっとかないだろ？
ほっとく	放っとく	v5k, vt	to leave alone, to leave as is, to ignore, to neglect	I'll bet the girls never leave you alone.	そんなんじゃ、あれだね。女の子もほっとかないだろ？
とかい	都会	n	city,Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly	There are a lot of temptations in the city…	都会にはいろいろ誘惑が多いんだろ？
ねえさん	姉さん	n	elder sister,young lady,miss,ma'am	an older girlfriend, one that'll take care of you.	ちょっとお姉さんであんたをグイグイ引っ張っていく
ぐいぐい		adv, adv-to, vs	without hesitation, with great optimism, vigorously, with great vigor, positively,(pushing or pulling) strongly,(drinking) heavily	an older girlfriend, one that'll take care of you.	ちょっとお姉さんであんたをグイグイ引っ張っていく
ひっぱる	引っ張る	v5r, vt	to pull, to draw, to pull tight,to string (lines), to run (cable), to stretch,to pull towards oneself (e.g. someone's sleeve),to drag, to haul, to tow,to lead (e.g. one's followers),to take someone somewhere (e.g. a suspect to the police),to tempt into joining, to strongly invite to join,to delay, to prolong,to lengthen the pronunciation (of a word),to quote, to cite, to reference,to pull the ball,to wear, to put on	an older girlfriend, one that'll take care of you.	ちょっとお姉さんであんたをグイグイ引っ張っていく
ぴったり		adv, adv-to, vs, adj-na	tightly, closely,exactly, precisely,suddenly (stopping),perfectly (suited), ideally	I think that would be best for you.	そんな女の子がピッタリだと思うんだけどね
いつのまにか	いつの間にか	adv	before one knows, before one becomes aware of, unnoticed, unawares	…I must've fallen asleep.	……いつのまにか眠ってしまったのか
こえる	越える	v1, vt	to cross over, to cross, to pass through, to pass over (out of), to go beyond, to go past,to exceed, to surpass, to be more (than)	Sector 7's past Sector 6… I should be all right by myself…	６番街をこえて７番街へ、か。１人でなんとかなりそうだな
むかし	昔	adj-no, n-adv, n-t	olden days, former	Yeah. Or, I used to be…	ああ。しかし、むかしの話だ…
ないしょ	内緒	n, adj-no	secrecy, confidentiality, privacy, secret,one's circumstances (esp. fiscal),inner realization, personal enlightenment,kitchen	could you please leave here tonight, without telling AERIS?	今夜のうちに出ていってくれないかい？AERISにはないしょでさ
おもい	思い	n	thought,imagination, mind, heart,desire, wish, hope, expectation,love, affection,feelings, emotion, sentiment, experience	SOLDIER…the last thing AERIS needs is to get hurt again.	ソルジャーなんて……またAERISが悲しい思いをすることになる……
たよる	頼る	v5r, vi	to rely on, to depend on, to count on, to turn to (for help)	I couldn't ask you to go. I knew it would be dangerous.	危険だとわかっているのにあんたにたよるわけにはいかないさ
ゲート		n	gate (for entry, boarding, etc.),gate,logic element	The gate to Sector 7's in there.	この奥に７番街へのゲートがあるの
もっか	目下	n-adv, n-t	at present, now	Can we take a break?	ちょっと休もっか
クラス		n	class	What rank were you?	あなた、クラスは？
ファースト		n, adj-no	first,first baseman, first base,fast	First Class.	クラス……１ＳＴ（ファースト）だ
おなじ	同じ	adv	same, identical, equal, uniform, equivalent, similar, common (origin), changeless, alike,anyway, anyhow, in either case	Just the same as him.	ふ～ん。　おんなじだ
もしか	若しか	adv	if, in case	I probably knew him. What was his name?	もしかしたら知ってるかもしれないな。そいつの名前は？