とくに	特に	adv	particularly, especially	This place is scary in a lot of ways. Especially for a girl. So we've got to find TIFA fast.	ここ、いろんな意味でこわいとこよ。とくに女の子にはね。早くTIFAさん、見つけなくちゃ
みつける	見つける	v1, vt	to discover, to find (e.g. an error in a book), to come across, to detect, to spot,to locate, to find (e.g. something missing), to find fault,to be used to seeing, to be familiar with	This place is scary in a lot of ways. Especially for a girl. So we've got to find TIFA fast.	ここ、いろんな意味でこわいとこよ。とくに女の子にはね。早くTIFAさん、見つけなくちゃ
くすりや	薬屋	n	pharmacy, drugstore, chemist's (shop), apothecary,pharmacist, druggist, chemist, apothecary	Please come in. There's a free 'Pharmacy Coupon' if you enter now.	どうぞ、よっていってください。今なら『薬屋商品クーポン』をサービスしますよ
しょうひん	商品	n	commodity, article of commerce, goods, stock, merchandise	Please come in. There's a free 'Pharmacy Coupon' if you enter now.	どうぞ、よっていってください。今なら『薬屋商品クーポン』をサービスしますよ
クーポン		n	coupon	Please come in. There's a free 'Pharmacy Coupon' if you enter now.	どうぞ、よっていってください。今なら『薬屋商品クーポン』をサービスしますよ
サービス		n	service, help, assistance, care, concern,discount, freebie, free gift,(after-sales) service, servicing, (product) maintenance,service (e.g. in tennis), serve	Please come in. There's a free 'Pharmacy Coupon' if you enter now.	どうぞ、よっていってください。今なら『薬屋商品クーポン』をサービスしますよ
せんしゃ	戦車	n	tank (military vehicle),chariot	According to that guy with the tank, if you're strong enough, anyone can make it to the top plate.	戦車じいさんの話によると体力さえあれば、上のプレートへ行けるそうですよ
じいさん	爺さん	n	grandfather (may be used after name as honorific),male senior-citizen (may be used after name as honorific)	According to that guy with the tank, if you're strong enough, anyone can make it to the top plate.	戦車じいさんの話によると体力さえあれば、上のプレートへ行けるそうですよ
たいりょく	体力	n	stamina, endurance, physical strength, resilience, resistance to disease,strength of an organization (e.g. profitability, productivity, economic clout, stability, growth potential)	According to that guy with the tank, if you're strong enough, anyone can make it to the top plate.	戦車じいさんの話によると体力さえあれば、上のプレートへ行けるそうですよ
しょくじ	食事	n, vs	meal, dinner,diet	So, build your strength by having a plate of our food.	という事で、ぜひ体力のつく食事をどうぞ
いまいち	今一	exp, adv	not quite (right), not very good, somewhat (lacking)	I just can't make up my mind… Mmm.	いまいち、ふんぎりがつかねえな。うーん
みぎて	右手	n, adj-no	right hand,right-hand side, right-hand direction, (on) the right	Hmmm, don't make me say it… It's the shop down on the right.	へへへ、いわせんなよこの右手の奥にある店のことだよ
はちみつ	蜂蜜	n	honey	Received Key Item Member's Card!	キーアイテム『蜂蜜の館会員カード』を手にいれた！
かいいん	会員	n	member, the membership	Received Key Item Member's Card!	キーアイテム『蜂蜜の館会員カード』を手にいれた！
にいさん	兄さん	n	older brother, elder brother,brother (as older-brother figure in friendly and or work relationship),young man, buddy, fella, laddie	Hey boy! You sure got a good-lookin' heifer there!	おっ！　そこのにいさん！べっぴんさん連れてるねぇ
べっぴん	別嬪	n	beautiful woman, pretty girl,high-quality goods, special article	Hey boy! You sure got a good-lookin' heifer there!	おっ！　そこのにいさん！べっぴんさん連れてるねぇ
たんまり		adv	quite a lot	Go to the Don's place. You'll make a small fortune!	ドンのとこへ行ってみな。たんまり稼げるぜ
かせげる	稼げる	v1	to work, to earn income	Go to the Don's place. You'll make a small fortune!	ドンのとこへ行ってみな。たんまり稼げるぜ
だんたい	団体	n	organization, organisation, association	Hey, y'all. Please stay here!	ちょっと、そこの団体さん。泊まっていってくださいよ
とまる	泊まる	v5r, vi	to stay at (e.g. hotel),to be docked, to be berthed, to be moored	Hey, y'all. Please stay here!	ちょっと、そこの団体さん。泊まっていってくださいよ
フリル		n	frill	Seems like everything has frills on it.	なんだか、変なフリルのついたのばっかりだなぁ
ねこ	猫	n	cat,shamisen,geisha,wheelbarrow,clay bed-warmer,bottom, [object Object]	Aren't cats great? This one's a little big, huh?	ネコは、いいよね。これは、ちょっと大きすぎるよね
くだる	下る	v5r, vi	to descend, to go down, to come down,to be handed down (of an order, judgment, etc.),to pass (of time),to surrender, to capitulate,to be less than, to be inferior to,to have the runs, to have diarrhea,to pass (in stool), to be discharged from the body,to depreciate oneself, to be humble	It came down from the sky.	空からいろいろ降ってきたよ
じいちゃん	爺ちゃん	n	grandfather (may be used after name as honorific),male senior-citizen (may be used after name as honorific)	But the old guy who likes tanks took all of it away. I wanted some, too.	でも全部、戦車好きのじいちゃんがもっていっちゃった。ぼくもほしかったのに
くらす	暮らす	v5s, vi	to live, to get along,to spend (time)	I wish I could live with a real cat.	本物のネコさんといっしょにくらしたいなぁ
たべる	食べる	v1, vt	to eat,to live on (e.g. a salary), to live off, to subsist on	It's a little early to start eating. Come back in a bit.	食べるには、まだ早いようですな。もうしばらくしてからおいでなさい
ふう	封	n	seal	Phew, it's all dusty ever since the sky came down. I'll have to start over.	ふう、空が落ちてきたからほこりだらけだ。また、作り直しだな
ほこり	誇り	n	pride, boast	Phew, it's all dusty ever since the sky came down. I'll have to start over.	ふう、空が落ちてきたからほこりだらけだ。また、作り直しだな
つくりなおす	作り直す	v5s, vt	to remake, to rebuild	Phew, it's all dusty ever since the sky came down. I'll have to start over.	ふう、空が落ちてきたからほこりだらけだ。また、作り直しだな
はらごしらえ	腹ごしらえ	n, vs	having a meal (before doing something), fortifying oneself with a meal	I don't know what's gonna happen next. But first, you gotta fill your stomach.	この先どうなるかわからんがまずは、腹ごしらえからですな
ごみ	塵	n	rubbish, trash, garbage, refuse	All this trash. Can't we do anything with it?	ここのゴミ。どうにかならないのかしらねえ
どうにか		adv, vs	in some way or other, one way or another, somehow, only just, barely	All this trash. Can't we do anything with it?	ここのゴミ。どうにかならないのかしらねえ
しゅじん	主人	n, adj-no	head (of a household), proprietor (of a store), proprietress, landlord, landlady,one's husband,(one's) employer, (one's) master,host, hostess	All this belongs to the owner of the Weapons Shop. He keeps picking things up and saving them here.	これって全部、あの、ほら……武器屋の、あそこのご主人。ひろってきては、ためこんでるそうよ
ためこむ	溜め込む	v5m, vt	to save up, to stockpile, to stash away, to hoard, to amass, to salt away	All this belongs to the owner of the Weapons Shop. He keeps picking things up and saving them here.	これって全部、あの、ほら……武器屋の、あそこのご主人。ひろってきては、ためこんでるそうよ
ふえる	増える	v1, vi	to increase, to multiply	Is this pile of trash getting bigger?	ここのゴミ。また、増えてません？
やしき	屋敷	n	residence, estate, grounds, premises, mansion	Oh, you mean he went out to the Plate cross section next to the Don's Mansion, right?	それってコルネオさんのお屋敷の横手のプレート断面へよく出かけてるって話ですよね？
よこて	横手	n, adj-no	side, beside,feature of a sword blade	Oh, you mean he went out to the Plate cross section next to the Don's Mansion, right?	それってコルネオさんのお屋敷の横手のプレート断面へよく出かけてるって話ですよね？
だんめん	断面	n	cross-section	Oh, you mean he went out to the Plate cross section next to the Don's Mansion, right?	それってコルネオさんのお屋敷の横手のプレート断面へよく出かけてるって話ですよね？
ごぞんじ	ご存じ	n	knowing,(an) acquaintance	Oh, you know! I wonder what he's doing?	あら、よくご存知で！でも、何してるんでしょうねえ？
ごい	語彙	n	vocabulary, lexicon, lexis, terminology	Wanna see somethin' awesome? Follow me!	すんごいの見れんだぜ。　ついてこいよ
みれる	見れる	v1	to be able to see	Wanna see somethin' awesome? Follow me!	すんごいの見れんだぜ。　ついてこいよ
みつばち	蜜蜂	n	honeybee (Apis sp.), honey bee	Honey Bee Inn	蜜蜂の館
ぶんがく	文学	n	literature	…I get so mental at times like this. I'm hopeless!!	ああ……俺ってこういうときなんか文学的になっちゃうんだよな。まいるぜ！！
すえ	末	n, adj-no	tip, top,end, close (e.g. close of the month),youngest child,descendants, offspring, posterity,future,finally,trivialities	What…me too. I decided this after a lot of deep thought. My last memories of Midgar…you know.	エッ……俺だってよ。よく考えたすえの結論だ。最後のミッドガルの思い出によ…
けつろん	結論	n, vs, adj-no	conclusion	What…me too. I decided this after a lot of deep thought. My last memories of Midgar…you know.	エッ……俺だってよ。よく考えたすえの結論だ。最後のミッドガルの思い出によ…
あん	案	n	idea, plan, proposal, suggestion, (government) bill,draft, rough copy,expectation,desk, stand	What the hell!? You *%^&!! This ain't no #$*&^% show!! I'm busy right now!!	あんだよ！！　てめー！！みせもんじゃねえぞ！！オレは、いまいそがしいんだよ！！
ビンビン		adv, adv-to, adj-no, adj-na	hard (e.g. penis), strong (e.g. beat of music), throbbing (e.g. headache), blaring (e.g. rock music)	I'm feelin' like there's gonna be a fight!!	ビンビンに感じてんだよ！！戦いの予感ってやつをよ！！
たたかい	戦い	n	battle, fight, struggle, conflict	I'm feelin' like there's gonna be a fight!!	ビンビンに感じてんだよ！！戦いの予感ってやつをよ！！
よかん	予感	vs	presentiment, premonition, hunch,to have a premonition, to have a hunch	I'm feelin' like there's gonna be a fight!!	ビンビンに感じてんだよ！！戦いの予感ってやつをよ！！
うんめい	運命	n	fate, destiny, lot	Welcome!! Even unpopular dweebs like you may meet their destiny here!!	いらっしゃい！！もてない君でも、ここ蜜蜂の館でなら運命の子に出会えるはず！！
むすめ	娘	n	(my) daughter,girl (i.e. a young, unmarried woman)	All the young bucks gather and deceive this innocent young girl…	若いもんがよってたかってな～んも知らないかわいい娘っ子をたぶらかす……
っこ	っ子	suf	someone with a liking or characteristic, a true representative of (place)	All the young bucks gather and deceive this innocent young girl…	若いもんがよってたかってな～んも知らないかわいい娘っ子をたぶらかす……
たぶらかす	誑かす	v5s, vt	to trick, to cheat, to deceive, to seduce	All the young bucks gather and deceive this innocent young girl…	若いもんがよってたかってな～んも知らないかわいい娘っ子をたぶらかす……
けんぜん	健全	adj-na, n	healthy, sound, wholesome	Ohhh boy!! It's healthy, it's wholesome!!	ウ～ン！！　健全健全！！若いうちはこうでなくっちゃいかん
ほん	本	suf, ctr	book, volume, script,this, present,main, head,real, regular,counter for long cylindrical things, counter for films, TV shows, etc., counter for goals, home runs, etc., counter for telephone calls	Yeah, I only talk to the pretty ones.	ほんとっもう、きれいな子にしか声かけてないんだから
いちばん	一番	n	number one, first, first place,best, most,game, round, bout,as a test, as an experiment, by way of experiment, by way of trial, tentatively,song (e.g. in noh), piece	Mmmm, you're the one. You're just great.	ん～、きみがいちばん。最高なんだなっあ
ききみみ	聞き耳	n	straining one's ears	Hey, you're pretty fast. TIFA's our newest girl.	おっ、あなた、聞き耳はやいねえ。TIFAちゃんはムチムチの新人さんだよ
むち	無知	n, adj-na	ignorance, innocence, stupidity	Hey, you're pretty fast. TIFA's our newest girl.	おっ、あなた、聞き耳はやいねえ。TIFAちゃんはムチムチの新人さんだよ
めんせつ	面接	n, vs	interview (e.g. for a job)	But, unfortunately, she's having an interview right now.	でも、残念です。TIFAちゃんはいま面接中
ならわす	習わす	v5s, vt	to make (someone) learn	Here at the Honey Bee Inn, it's customary for all the new girls to be taken to Don Corneo's mansion.	蜜蜂の館のならわしでね。新人の子はドン・コルネオの屋敷につれてかれるんだ
どくしん	独身	n, adj-no	bachelorhood, single, unmarried, celibate	Don Corneo's a famous dilettante. Now he wants to settle down and is in the market for a bride.	ドン・コルネオは有名な独身貴族。そろそろ身をかためるってんでおヨメさんさがしに熱心でねえ
きぞく	貴族	n, adj-no	noble, aristocrat, peer	Don Corneo's a famous dilettante. Now he wants to settle down and is in the market for a bride.	ドン・コルネオは有名な独身貴族。そろそろ身をかためるってんでおヨメさんさがしに熱心でねえ
かためる	固める	v1, vt	to harden, to freeze, to strengthen, to solidify, to make (a fist), to tramp down (snow, dirt),to put together, to collect, to gather, to consolidate,to make secure, to stabilize, to settle down, to strengthen (belief, resolution, etc.), to establish (evidence),to fortify, to reinforce, to support,to wear for a specific purpose (armor, coat, etc.),to swear, to resolutely vow, to sincerely promise,to tie tightly, to fasten,to hold a bow fully drawn	Don Corneo's a famous dilettante. Now he wants to settle down and is in the market for a bride.	ドン・コルネオは有名な独身貴族。そろそろ身をかためるってんでおヨメさんさがしに熱心でねえ
まにあう	間に合う	v5u, vi	to be in time for,to serve (suit, meet) the purpose, to be good enough, to be enough	Hmm…Seems to like it just fine. Good for you.	ほう……まにあってますか。そりゃ、けっこうですな
せい	制	n, n-suf	system, organization, organisation, imperial command, laws, regulation, control, government, suppression, restraint, holding back, establishment	The Honey Bee Inn is a private club. Only members can go in. Shoo, shoo.	蜜蜂の館は会員制になっております。残念ですが、おひきとりください
ひきとる	引き取る	v5r, vt	to take over, to take back, to collect, to claim,to take charge of, to take custody of, to look after, to take care of, to adopt,to retire to a private place, to withdraw, to get out	The Honey Bee Inn is a private club. Only members can go in. Shoo, shoo.	蜜蜂の館は会員制になっております。残念ですが、おひきとりください
かがやく	輝く	v5k	to shine, to glitter, to sparkle	Hey! Is that a "Member's Card" I see shining in your hot little hand? Please, come in.	おっ！右手にかがやく『会員カード』どうぞ、お通りください
ごまかす	誤魔化す	v5s, vt	to deceive, to falsify, to misrepresent, to cheat, to swindle, to tamper, to juggle, to manipulate,to dodge, to beg the question (issue, difficulties),to varnish over, to gloss over	…Hmmmm. Sure, good excuse…	…………ふ～～～～ん。そうやって、ごまかしますか
じょそう	女装	n, vs	female clothing, wearing female clothing, cross dressing (for a man)	Looks like I need to go inside to complete my disguise.	ここに女装に必要ななにかがある。俺にはわかるんだ
わすれもの	忘れ物	n	lost article, something forgotten	So, please remember any personal belongings.	忘れ物などなさらぬよう気をつけてくださいよ
しぜん	自然	adv, adv-to	nature,natural, spontaneous,naturally, spontaneously	It just seems natural to get cautious…	なんだか、自然と警戒しちゃうんです～
きける	聞ける	v1, vt	to tell	500 gil, a little expensive. Well, at least I got her name.	５００ギル、ちょっと高いかなあ。名前きけたから、まあゆるしますか
おしばな	押し花	n	pressed flower	I'll treasure this! I'm going to dry it and keep it for good luck.	俺、大切にすっから！押し花にして、お守りにすんだ
おまもり	お守り	n	charm, amulet	I'll treasure this! I'm going to dry it and keep it for good luck.	俺、大切にすっから！押し花にして、お守りにすんだ
さそう	誘う	v5u, vt	to invite, to ask (someone to do), to call (for), to take (someone) along,to tempt, to lure, to entice, to seduce,to induce (tears, laughter, sleepiness, etc.), to arouse (e.g. sympathy), to provoke	I asked AERIS for a date…	AERISちゃんデートにさそったらさ
まん	万	n, adj-no	10,000, ten thousand,myriad,everything, all,various	And she said not even if I paid her 1,000,000 gil. Her flowers cost 300 gil, too… She's a good business woman.	１００万ギルつまれてもいやだって。お花は３００ギルもするし……。意外と商売じょうずだぜ、ありゃ
つむ	積む	v5m, vt	to pile up, to stack,to load (car, ship, etc.), to pack,to acquire, to accumulate	And she said not even if I paid her 1,000,000 gil. Her flowers cost 300 gil, too… She's a good business woman.	１００万ギルつまれてもいやだって。お花は３００ギルもするし……。意外と商売じょうずだぜ、ありゃ
しょうばい	商売	n, vs	trade, business, commerce, transaction, occupation	And she said not even if I paid her 1,000,000 gil. Her flowers cost 300 gil, too… She's a good business woman.	１００万ギルつまれてもいやだって。お花は３００ギルもするし……。意外と商売じょうずだぜ、ありゃ
じょうず	上手	n	skillful, skilled, proficient, good (at), adept, clever,flattery	And she said not even if I paid her 1,000,000 gil. Her flowers cost 300 gil, too… She's a good business woman.	１００万ギルつまれてもいやだって。お花は３００ギルもするし……。意外と商売じょうずだぜ、ありゃ
じょし	女子	n, adj-no	woman, girl	Ummm, young girls…soft skin. Ummm, OK, I'm refreshed now!	お、若いおなごにピチピチおはだ。う～ん、目がさめましたよ！
きたえる	鍛える	v1, vt	to forge, to temper,to drill, to train, to discipline	Mmmm? Pretty hard. You work out?	……ん？　かたいねぇ。きたえてるの？
かしぐ	傾ぐ	v5g, vi	to incline toward, to slant, to lurch, to heel over, to be disposed to, to trend toward, to be prone to,to go down (sun), to wane, to sink, to decline	That's funny. A hard, spiky hairstyle! Looks kinda familiar…	おっかしいなあ。バリバリにツンツンのヘアスタイル！見覚えあるんだけどなあ
ヘアスタイル		n	hairstyle	That's funny. A hard, spiky hairstyle! Looks kinda familiar…	おっかしいなあ。バリバリにツンツンのヘアスタイル！見覚えあるんだけどなあ
みおぼえ	見覚え	n	remembrance, recollection, recognition	That's funny. A hard, spiky hairstyle! Looks kinda familiar…	おっかしいなあ。バリバリにツンツンのヘアスタイル！見覚えあるんだけどなあ
しゅみ	趣味	n	hobby, pastime,tastes, preference, liking	Sorry, but I already heard about you. In addition to dressing like a woman, it seems you like to smash and grind things.	悪いけど、噂は聞いたぜ。女装が趣味の上にキュ～っとすりつぶすのが好きだって
すりつぶす	すり潰す	v5s, vt	to mash, to grind, to pulverize, to pulverise, to deface,to dissipate (a fortune), to run through, to lose	Sorry, but I already heard about you. In addition to dressing like a woman, it seems you like to smash and grind things.	悪いけど、噂は聞いたぜ。女装が趣味の上にキュ～っとすりつぶすのが好きだって
じょうひん	上品	adj-na, n	elegant, refined, polished	We only let cultured customers in! Got it? Then you'd better leave!	うちは上品なお客様以外、お断り！わかったら、おひきとりねがうぜ！
おことわり	お断わり	n	declining, nonacceptance, declination, refusal, rejection, turndown	We only let cultured customers in! Got it? Then you'd better leave!	うちは上品なお客様以外、お断り！わかったら、おひきとりねがうぜ！
せんりょう	占領	n, vs	occupying, having (an area) all to oneself,military occupation, possession, capture, seizure	Heee… The Shinra have occupied this shop!	イヒヒ……この店は神羅が占領した！
おおもの	大物	n, adj-no	important person, big-shot, bigwig,big game (animal, fish), big thing, valuable thing	This is Don Corneo's mansion. He's a big shot here in Wall Market.	ここは、ウォールマーケットの大物、ドン・コルネオ様のお屋敷だ
むりやり	無理やり	adv, n	forcibly, against one's will	Well being a man, that'll be pretty hard. Besides if I bust in there, it'll cause too much commotion.	俺は男だからな。むりやりはいったら騒ぎになってしまう
へんそう	変装	n, vs	disguise, masquerade	CLOUD, why don't you dress up like a girl? It's the only way.	CLOUD、女の子に変装しなさい。それしかない、うん
くすり	薬	n	medicine, pharmaceuticals, (legal) drugs, pill, ointment, salve,efficacious chemical (gunpowder, pesticide, etc.),(pottery) glaze,small bribe	Got any medicine on you? I'm too hyper…and…ugh.	ねえ、あんたなんか薬もってないかい？はしゃぎ過ぎちゃってさ……う………
はしゃぐ	燥ぐ	v5g, vi	to make merry, to frolic, to be in high spirits	Got any medicine on you? I'm too hyper…and…ugh.	ねえ、あんたなんか薬もってないかい？はしゃぎ過ぎちゃってさ……う………
すっきり		adv, adv-to, vs	refreshingly, with a feeling of relief, pleasantly, (a weight) off one's shoulder,shapely, neatly, refinedly,cleanly, without trouble,clearly, plainly, distinctly,completely, thoroughly,not at all (with negative sentence), not even slightly	Phew, I feel better now. This is for your kindness.	ふー、すっきりしたよ。お礼に、これあげるよ
おれい	お礼	n	thanks, gratitude,manners, etiquette,bow,reward, gift,ceremony, ritual	Phew, I feel better now. This is for your kindness.	ふー、すっきりしたよ。お礼に、これあげるよ
きもち	気持ち	adv	feeling, sensation, mood,preparedness, readiness, attitude,thanks, solicitude, sympathy,just a little, somewhat, slightly	It didn't do a thing, but thanks anyways. Here, this is for your kindness.	役には立たなかったけど気持ちはうれしかったよ。お礼に、これあげるよ
コロン		n	colon,eau de Cologne,colonist	Received Key Item "Cologne"!	キーアイテム『コロン』を手にいれた！
フラワー		n	flower	Received Key Item "Flower Cologne"!	キーアイテム『フラワーコロン』を手にいれた！
セクシー		adj-na	sexy	Received Key Item "Sexy Cologne"!	キーアイテム『セクシーコロン』を手にいれた！
だれか	誰か	pn	someone, somebody	Hey, could you do somethin' for me? Someone's been in there all day and they're not comin' out. I can't hold it anymore!	おい、どうにかしてくれよ。誰かが入ったきり出てこないんだ。もう、ガマンできないよ
ちゅうもん	注文	n, vs, adj-no	order, request	Yes? If you want to order, do it at the counter.	なんですか、お客さん。注文ならカウンターごしに　おねがいします
カウンター		n	counter,service counter (e.g. at a bank),counter (at a bar, cafe, etc.),automatically responding with an upload slot to someone who allows you to download (e.g. in P2P systems)	Yes? If you want to order, do it at the counter.	なんですか、お客さん。注文ならカウンターごしに　おねがいします
おやじ	親父	n	one's father, old man, one's boss	Excuse us, are you the father of the girl at the Clothing Store?	あの～、服屋の親父さん、ですよね？
おとこもの	男物	adj-no	men's things, menswear, men's wear,men's, for men	I don't make men's clothes. And I don't feel like makin' anything right now.	わしは男物の服は作らんのだが？それに、あまり気乗りがせんしな
きのり	気乗り	n, adj-no, vs	interest (in something), enthusiasm	I don't make men's clothes. And I don't feel like makin' anything right now.	わしは男物の服は作らんのだが？それに、あまり気乗りがせんしな
せんする	僭する	vs-s	to usurp boastfully	I don't make men's clothes. And I don't feel like makin' anything right now.	わしは男物の服は作らんのだが？それに、あまり気乗りがせんしな
ドレス		n	dress	So, that's why I wanted a cute dress for him…	それでね、かわいいドレス着せてあげたいんだけど……
きせる	着せる	v1, vt	to put clothes on (someone),to plate, to gild, to veneer,to accuse (of some crime), to give (a bad name)	So, that's why I wanted a cute dress for him…	それでね、かわいいドレス着せてあげたいんだけど……
ぶあいそう	無愛想	adj-na, n	unsociability, bluntness, surliness, curtness, brusqueness	What!? A tough lookin' guy like that?	なんと！あんな無愛想なやつがか？
ふつう	普通	n	general, ordinary, usual,normally, generally, usually,local train, train that stops at every station	…might be interesting. I was gettin' a little bored just makin' regular clothes.	ふむ、なかなかおもしろそうだのう。普通の服ばかり作っておったのでちょっとあきとったんだよ
さわり	触り	n	feel, touch,impression (of a person),most impressive passage, highlight, punch line,beginning	Something…	はだ触りは
さらう	浚う	v5u, vt	to sweep away, to wash away, to dredge	That feels clean	さらっとしたの
さわる	障る	v5r, vi	to be harmful to, to hinder, to interfere with, to irritate	That feels soft	さわっとしたの
ぐあい	具合	n	condition, state,health, state (of health),way, manner,circumstance, luck,face, dignity, decency, propriety	And something…	ひかり具合は
つやつや	艶々	adv, adv-to, vs, adj-no	glossy, bright, slick	that shimmers	つやつやしたの
しりあい	知り合い	n	acquaintance	Hmm, got it. Y'know I got a friend that has the same taste as him. I'll go talk to him.	ふんふん、ようわかったわい。知り合いにその手のことが趣味な奴がおるので、ちょっと聞いてくるわい
なす	為す	aux-v	to build up, to establish,to form, to become (a state),to accomplish, to achieve, to succeed in,to change into,to do, to perform,to intend to, to attempt, to try	Hey, hold on. Wait till I get an image in my head. Gulp…ummm, that's good.	なんじゃ、そう急ぎなさんな。イメージがわくまで待たんとな。ゴクゴク　ふー　うまいのう
イメージ		n	(one's) image, impression, mental image, (mental) picture, view,(computer) image	Hey, hold on. Wait till I get an image in my head. Gulp…ummm, that's good.	なんじゃ、そう急ぎなさんな。イメージがわくまで待たんとな。ゴクゴク　ふー　うまいのう
やどや	宿屋	n	inn	Inn	宿屋
いらっしゃる		v5aru, aux-v	to come, to go, to be (somewhere),to be (doing)	Welcome. It'll be  Gil per night.	いらっしゃいませ。一泊　ギルです
いっぱく	一泊	n, vs, adj-no	stopping one night	Welcome. It'll be  Gil per night.	いらっしゃいませ。一泊　ギルです
またぐ	跨ぐ	v5g, vt	to step over, to step across, to stride over, to stride across, to cross,to stretch over, to span, to bridge, to saddle, to straddle	All right then… Please come again.	そうですか、またいらしてください
やすみ	休み	n	rest, recess, respite,vacation, holiday, absence, suspension,dormancy (of a silkworm prior to moulting)	…We're closed now.	………今は休みだよ
きらす	切らす	v5s, vt	to run out of, to be short of, to be out of stock,to be out of (e.g. breath), to lose (one's patience, concentration, etc.)	I'm sorry, we're sold out and I've got nothing for you.	すいませんねえちょっと切らしちゃってなんにもないんですよ
なんにも	何にも	adv	nothing at all	I'm sorry, we're sold out and I've got nothing for you.	すいませんねえちょっと切らしちゃってなんにもないんですよ
そちら	其方	pn	that way (direction distant from the speaker, close to the listener),there (place distant from the speaker, close to the listener),that one (something close to the listener),you, your family, your company,that person (someone close to the listener)	I'm sorry, but young lady… Would you turn the other way, for a second?	………で、悪いんだけどそっちのおじょうさんちょっとだけ向こうを向いててくれないかな
ほんだい	本題	n	main question, real issue at hand	Now here's the thing. Do you know that vending machine in the Inn?	で、本題なんだけど宿屋の中に自動販売機があるのは知っているか？
じどう	自動	n	automatic action, automation operation, self-motion,intransitive verb	Now here's the thing. Do you know that vending machine in the Inn?	で、本題なんだけど宿屋の中に自動販売機があるのは知っているか？
はんばい	販売	n, vs	sales, selling, marketing	Now here's the thing. Do you know that vending machine in the Inn?	で、本題なんだけど宿屋の中に自動販売機があるのは知っているか？
はた	機	n	loom	Now here's the thing. Do you know that vending machine in the Inn?	で、本題なんだけど宿屋の中に自動販売機があるのは知っているか？
しょうが	生姜	n	ginger (Zingiber officinale)	I'm itchin' to know what they're selling in it. I just can't ask a girl to go get it.	俺はあの自動販売機でなにを売っているのか気になってしょうがないんだよ。ちょっと女性には頼めない物らしいんだよ
ひきうける	引き受ける	v1, vt	to take on, to undertake, to accept, to take charge of, to assume responsibility for,to take over, to inherit,to guarantee, to vouch for,to contract (a disease)	I'll go	引き受けよう
きあい	気合	n	scream, yell, fighting spirit	A protein drink set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	気合充填ドリンクゴールドセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
じゅうてん	充填	n, vs	filling (up), replenishing, filling in (tooth), loading (gun with ammunition, camera with film, etc.), packing, plugging	A protein drink set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	気合充填ドリンクゴールドセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
ドリンク		n	drink	A protein drink set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	気合充填ドリンクゴールドセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
ゴールド		adj-na, n	gold	A protein drink set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	気合充填ドリンクゴールドセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
きっちり		adv, adv-to, vs	exactly, precisely, punctually, on the dot,closely, tightly, (fitting) perfectly,properly, without fail	A protein drink set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	気合充填ドリンクゴールドセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
まける	負ける	v1, vt	to lose, to be defeated,to succumb, to give in, to surrender, to yield,to be inferior to,to break out in a rash due to (e.g. lacquer, shaving, etc.),to reduce the price, to give a discount, to throw in (something extra) for free	A protein drink set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	気合充填ドリンクゴールドセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
スタミナ		n, adj-no	stamina, energy	A Stamina Drink Set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	スタミナ回復ドラッグセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
ドラッグ		vs	drag,drug, medicine,(illegal) drug, narcotics,to highlight (e.g. by click-dragging a cursor over text)	A Stamina Drink Set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	スタミナ回復ドラッグセットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
きん	金	suf, ctr	gold (Au), golden (color), gold (medal, cup),valuable, of highest value,money, gold coin,Friday,metal (fourth of the five elements),Jin (dynasty of China; 1115-1234 CE),gold general,testicles,karat, carat	A Muscle Relaxing Cream Set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	キン肉スッキリぬり薬セットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
にく	肉	n	flesh,meat,the physical body (as opposed to the spirit),thickness,ink pad	A Muscle Relaxing Cream Set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	キン肉スッキリぬり薬セットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
ぬる	塗る	v5r, vt	to paint, to plaster, to lacquer, to varnish, to spread, to smear, to put up (wallpaper)	A Muscle Relaxing Cream Set. That jerk. I'm gonna do so much more business than him, his head'll spin.	キン肉スッキリぬり薬セットかあいつめ、きっちり商売してやがるぜ。まけてられんな、こりゃ
やるき	やる気	n	willingness (e.g. to do something), eagerness, motivation, inspiration, determination, high aspirations	Thanks, bud. I'm motivated now. Take this, it's not much…	お兄さん、ありがとうよ。やる気になってきたぜ。気持ちていどだけど、もらってくれよ
ルビー		n	ruby,ruby character, [object Object],Ruby (programming language)	Received Key Item "Ruby Tiara"!	キーアイテム『ルビーのティアラ』を手にいれた！
ガラス	硝子	adj-f	glass, pane,vitreous	Received Key Item "Glass Tiara"!	キーアイテム『ガラスのティアラ』を手にいれた！
のす	伸す	v5s, vt	to stretch, to extend, to lengthen, to spread,to gain influence, to become stronger, to increase (e.g. in scope),to go further,to smooth out, to roll out,to spread out (something folded),to iron,to knock out, to knock down	Let's do some shoppin'.	おかいものしましょうや
しざい	資材	n	(raw) material	You want somethin'? I don't wanna hear any complaints bout how things look.	なにか用か？資材置き場のもんくは聞かねえぞ
おきば	置き場	n	place for something, storehouse	You want somethin'? I don't wanna hear any complaints bout how things look.	なにか用か？資材置き場のもんくは聞かねえぞ
うりつける	売りつける	v1, vt	to palm off, to force a sale	You're gonna sell me something you just found?	ひろったものを売りつけるのか？
しゅうり	修理	n, vs	repair, mending, fixing, servicing	Hey, you knew? I repaired them, so it's all right.	お、よく知ってるな。修理してあるから、大丈夫さ
バッテリー		n	battery,battery, [object Object]	Why do I need batteries to climb up to the plate?	上のプレートへ登るのにどうしてバッテリーが必要なんだ？
たしかめる	確かめる	v1, vt	to ascertain, to check, to make sure	All right then, go see for yourself. You'll be back again.	そうか、自分の目で確かめてまた来たらいいだろう
かむ	噛む	v5m, vt	to bite, to chew, to gnaw,to crash against (e.g. of waves), to break onto (shore),to engage (of cogs, zippers, etc.), to mesh, to fit together,to be involved in,to fumble one's words (during a play, broadcast, etc.), to falter with one's words,to strongly confute, to argue down, to rebuke, to scold harshly	Great! How 'bout another one?	そうかそうかもう１つどうだい？
だしもの	出し物	n	program (e.g. theatre, theater), programme,(theatrical) piece, number, performance, feature	Oh, so you're back? I got something good for you. Why don't you buy it?	よう、また来たな。ちょっと出物があるんだが買ってかないか？
みとめる	認める	v1, vt	to recognize, to recognise, to observe, to notice,to deem, to judge, to assess,to approve, to deem acceptable, to allow,to admit, to accept, to confess (to a charge),to watch steadily, to observe carefully,to renown, to give renown to, to appreciate, to acknowledge	I'll admit that I found it, but you may never be able to get another one like it again.	まあ、ひろったのは認めるがこんなにいいものはもう手にはいらないかもな
ねだん	値段	n	price, cost	…What kind of price is that?	……なんて値段だ
そん	損	n, adj-na	loss, damage, harm, unprofitable,disadvantage, handicap, drawback, unfavorable	Hey, much obliged. You'll never regret it!	おう、ありがたい。絶対に、損をしたと思わないよ
ぞく	族	n, n-suf	tribe, clan, band,(taxonomical) tribe,group (of the periodic table)	Received "Sneak Glove"!	『盗族の小手』を手にいれた！
こて	籠手	n	gauntlet (used in Kendo), bracer, fencing glove	Received "Sneak Glove"!	『盗族の小手』を手にいれた！
パー		n	par,paper (in rock, paper, scissors game),apiece, each,percent	…Beeeeeep… blipppp…	………ヒ……パー…………
うわる	植わる	v5r, vi	to be planted	Whoa!	うわっ！
まかせる	任せる	v1, vt	to entrust (e.g. a task) to another, to leave to,to passively leave to someone else's facilities,to leave to take its natural course,to continue (something) in a natural fashion (without particular aim),to rely fully on one's (full strength, great ability, long time taken) to get something done	Hmm? Let me see that.	どれどれ？オレ様にまかせとけって
さわる	触る	v5r, vi	to touch, to feel	It should work now. Go on, try it now.	これで、動くんじゃねえか？ネエちゃん、触ってみてくれよ
しわ	皺	n	wrinkle, crease,ripple	Don't get mad, you'll just get more wrinkles. Hey, something's comin' out.	そう怒るなよ、シワが増えるぞ。お、何か出てきたぜ
プレミアム		n	premium	Received "Premium Heart"!	『プレミアムハート』を手にいれた！
ハート		n	heart	Received "Premium Heart"!	『プレミアムハート』を手にいれた！
しょうどく	消毒	n, vs	disinfection, sterilization, sterilisation	Disinfectant	消毒薬
しゅう	臭	suf	-smell, stinking of,smacking of, hinting of	Deodorant	消臭薬
しょうか	消化	n, vs	digestion (of food),digestion (of information), assimilation, thorough understanding,consumption, absorption, using up, meeting (e.g. a quota), completion,losing one's form and turning into something else	Digestive	消化薬
ていしょく	定食	n	set meal, special (of the day)	Diner	定食屋
やきにく	焼肉	n	yakiniku, [object Object],roasted meat, grill	Korean B.B.Q. Plate	焼肉定食
さす	刺す	v5s, vt	to pierce, to stab, to prick, to stick, to thrust,to sting, to bite,to sew, to stitch, to embroider,to pole (a boat),to catch (with a limed pole),to put (a runner) out, to pick off	Sushi Plate	さしみ定食
とうてん	当店	n	this store	In this store, you pay first. It'll be 70 Gil.	当店は、料金前払いになっております。お代は　７０ギルになります
りょうきん	料金	n	fee, charge, fare	In this store, you pay first. It'll be 70 Gil.	当店は、料金前払いになっております。お代は　７０ギルになります
まえばらい	前払い	n, vs	payment in advance, prepayment	In this store, you pay first. It'll be 70 Gil.	当店は、料金前払いになっております。お代は　７０ギルになります
おだい	お代	n	charge (e.g. admission, menu item), cost, price	In this store, you pay first. It'll be 70 Gil.	当店は、料金前払いになっております。お代は　７０ギルになります
てんちょう	店長	n	shop manager	Hey! Cancel that last order!	店長！　オーダー取り消しです
オーダー		n, vs	order	Hey! Cancel that last order!	店長！　オーダー取り消しです
またせる	待たせる	v1, vt	to keep (a person) waiting	There you go. Enjoy.	おまたせしました。どうぞ、ごゆっくり
こうかん	交換	n, vs	exchange, interchange, switching, reciprocity, barter, substitution, replacement, clearing (of checks, cheques)	Thank you. Here's an item coupon for the Pharmacy.	ありがとうございました。薬屋商品クーポンをどうぞ。薬屋で、商品ひとつと交換できます
しゅうりょう	終了	n, vs	end, close, termination	You can exchange it for one item there. That's our last coupon for now. Watch for our NEXT promotion!	クーポンがなくなりましたので、このサービスは終了させていただきます。次なるサービスにご期待ください
いただく	頂く	aux-v, v5k	to receive, to get, to accept, to take, to buy,to eat, to drink,to be crowned with, to wear (on one's head), to have (on top),to have (as one's leader), to live under (a ruler), to install (a president),to get somebody to do something	You can exchange it for one item there. That's our last coupon for now. Watch for our NEXT promotion!	クーポンがなくなりましたので、このサービスは終了させていただきます。次なるサービスにご期待ください
おすわり	お座り	n, vs	sit down, sit up,Sit! (to a dog)	Have a seat over here.	どうぞ、ここへおすわりください
めし	飯	n	cooked rice,meal, food,one's livelihood	It's thanks to the Don that we can eat like this.	こうやってメシが食えるのもドンのおかげだよ
もぐもぐ		adv, vs, adv-to	mumbling, chewing one's words,chewing (food),squirming, wriggling	…umf…scarf…glub…	モグモグ………
まんせき	満席	n, adj-no	full house, all seats occupied, fully occupied	Sorry! But we're completely full! Please come again!	すいませーん。今、満席なんです。また、来てください
ふとる	太る	v5r, vi	to grow fat (stout, plump), to become fat, to gain weight	Oh dear. I've gained weight again.	やーねぇ。またふとっちゃったわ
パイプ		n	pipe, tube,channels, official or otherwise, (business) connections,tobacco pipe	I bet you could climb all the way up to the upper plate if you used that pipe.	あのパイプを登り切れば上のプレートへ行けるそうですからね
リズム		n	rhythm	All right…1, 2, 3. Squats are all in the rhythm.	はい、１、２、３スクワットはリズムですよ
かつら	鬘	n	wig, hairpiece, toupee	And about the wig…	それで、かつらなんだけど……
あにき	兄貴	n	elder brother,one's senior,older man, man older than oneself	Big Bro!! The only way you're gonna get cuter is if you can beat Big Bro!!	兄貴！かわいい格好は兄貴を極めた者のみができるんですぜ！！
ルール		n	rule	No, I'll explain the rules.	じゃあ、ルールを説明するわね
たち	立ち	pref	departure, setting off, start,being used up, being consumed, being burnt out,passage of time, lapse,rehearsal,leading male role in kabuki,rising from a crouch to charge, initial charge, faceoff,[object Object]	From the ready position, push [SWITCH] to squat, push [CANCEL] to get up, and push [OK] to go back to the ready position.	かまえから□ボタンでしゃがむしゃがみから×ボタンで立つ立ちから○ボタンでかまえへ
ぶっつけ	打っ付け	n	without preparation, off the cuff, abrupt, without warning,unreserved, without restraint, frank, blunt, direct,beginning, start, outset	It's not fair for you to start right away, So, you want some practice?	ぶっつけ本番ってのもかわいそうだから、練習する？
かわいそう	可哀想	adj-na, n	poor, pitiable, pathetic, pitiful	It's not fair for you to start right away, So, you want some practice?	ぶっつけ本番ってのもかわいそうだから、練習する？
れんしゅう	練習	n, vs	practice, practising	It's not fair for you to start right away, So, you want some practice?	ぶっつけ本番ってのもかわいそうだから、練習する？
まけ	負け	n	defeat, loss, losing (a game),failing to live up to (one's name, looks, etc.),discount, loss (on a sale)	Sorry You lose.	残念でした。あなたの負けね
ひきわけ	引き分け	n	draw (in competition), tie game	Oh, a tie.	あらまぁ、引き分けね
かち	勝ち	n	win, victory	Congratulations, you win.	おめでとー、あなたの勝ちね
たのみ	頼み	n	request, favor, favour,reliance, dependence, trust, hope	Since the old man from the clothing store asked me, I can't keep it from you, so…	服屋のおやじの頼みだから渡さないわけには、いかないから
しまる	閉まる	v5r, vi	to be shut, to close, to be closed,to be firm (of a body, face, etc.), to be well-knit,to be locked,to tighten, to be tightened,to become sober, to become tense	Oh, now where did I put it?	あれ、どこへしまったのかしら？
ぼけ	惚け	n, suf	idiot, fool, touched in the head (from), out of it (from), space case,funny man (of a comedy duo), (in comedy) silly or stupid line,Alzheimer's (impol)	Stupid! What kinda place is that to hide it in!?	こん、ボケ！なんてとこに隠してやがんだ！
てつ	鉄	n, n-pref	iron (Fe),strong and hard (as iron),railway,railway enthusiast	Uuuuhh, Bro's fists of steel cut to the bone!	うう、兄貴の鉄ケンは骨のズイまでしびれやすぜ…
けん	券	n, n-suf	ticket, coupon, bond, certificate	Uuuuhh, Bro's fists of steel cut to the bone!	うう、兄貴の鉄ケンは骨のズイまでしびれやすぜ…
ほね	骨	adj-na, n	bone,frame,outline, core,backbone, spirit, fortitude,laborious, troublesome, difficult	Uuuuhh, Bro's fists of steel cut to the bone!	うう、兄貴の鉄ケンは骨のズイまでしびれやすぜ…
しびれる	痺れる	v1, vi	to become numb, to go to sleep (e.g. a limb),to get an electric shock, to tingle (from an electric shock),to be excited, to be titillated, to be mesmerized, to be enthralled	Uuuuhh, Bro's fists of steel cut to the bone!	うう、兄貴の鉄ケンは骨のズイまでしびれやすぜ…
あたし	私	pn	I, me	Good job. Here's a hand-me-down.	あなた、よくがんばったわね。あたしのお古をあげるわね
おふる	お古	n	used article (esp. clothes)	Good job. Here's a hand-me-down.	あなた、よくがんばったわね。あたしのお古をあげるわね
もらえる	貰える	v1	to be able to receive, to be able to take, to be able to accept,could you (give me), would you, can you	Hey, Bro I…I was supposed to get that.	あ、兄貴そ、それはあっしがもらえるはず……
ひきわける	引き分ける	v1, vt	to pull apart, to separate,to draw, to tie (a game)	Shut up! You have no room to talk, tying with a beginner like him!!	やかましい！素人さんと引き分けといてなまいき言ってんじゃねえ！！
いき	行き	n	the way there, outbound leg, outbound trip, departing leg,bound for ...,outbound ticket	Shut up! You have no room to talk, tying with a beginner like him!!	やかましい！素人さんと引き分けといてなまいき言ってんじゃねえ！！
むちゃくちゃ	無茶苦茶	adv	nonsensical, unreasonable, absurd, unrealistic,awfully, extremely, to excess, senseless, reckless,disorder, confusion, being jumbled, being mixed up,very, extremely, excessively	Big Bro I'm so mad I'm so so so---mad!	兄貴っーくやしいっすよーむちゃくちゃくやしいっすよー！
あげく	挙句	n	in the end (after a long process), finally, after all, at last,last line (of a renga)	Shut up! Don't cry, just because you lost!	やかましー！負けたあげくに、めそめそすんじゃねえ！
メソメソ		adv, adv-to, vs	sobbing, weeping, whimpering	Shut up! Don't cry, just because you lost!	やかましー！負けたあげくに、めそめそすんじゃねえ！
ブロンド		n, adj-no	blonde	Received Key Item "Blonde Wig"!	キーアイテム『ブロンドのかつら』を手にいれた！
だいじ	大事	adj-na	important, serious, crucial,valuable, precious,serious matter, major incident, matter of grave concern, crisis,great undertaking, great enterprise, great thing,safe, OK	Take care of it.	大事につかってね
ブティック		n, adj-no	boutique	Boutique	ブティック
ちゃく	着	suf	counter for suits of clothing,arriving at ...	Excuse me! I'd like to get a dress.	すいませ～ん！ドレス１着、くださいな
スランプ		n	slump	Well, my father, the owner, has been in a slump lately. You see, he makes all the dresses.	ちょっと親父の奴スランプなんですよ。あ、ドレスは俺の親父が作ってるんですよ
どちら	何方	pn	which way, which direction, where,which one (esp. of two alternatives),who	And, where is your father?	その、親父さん、どちらに？
たぶん	多分	adj-na, adj-no	perhaps, probably,generous, many, much, great	He's probably plastered at the bar.	たぶん、居酒屋で飲んだくれてますよ
こまりはてる	困り果てる	v1, vi	to be at a complete loss, to be without recourse, to be completely stymied, to have absolutely no idea what to do	Really!? Please help my crazy old dad. I just don't know what to do anymore…	本当っすか！おねがいしますよ、あのバカ親父をどうにかしてくださいよ。もう、困り果ててたんすよ………
たんす	箪笥	n	chest of drawers, bureau, cabinet, tansu, dresser	Really!? Please help my crazy old dad. I just don't know what to do anymore…	本当っすか！おねがいしますよ、あのバカ親父をどうにかしてくださいよ。もう、困り果ててたんすよ………
きる	着る	v1, vt	to wear (in modern Japanese, from the shoulders down), to put on,to bear (guilt, etc.)	Oh, you're here. It's ready. Go try it on.	よう、来たな。できとるよ。さっそく着てみなさい
コットン		n	cotton,cotton pads (usu. in amenity set), cotton buds	Received Key Item "Cotton Dress"!	キーアイテム『コットンのドレス』を手にいれた！
サテン		n	satin	Received Key Item "Satin Dress"!	キーアイテム『サテンのドレス』を手にいれた！
シルク		n	silk	Received Key Item "Silk Dress"!	キーアイテム『シルクのドレス』を手にいれた！
かんばん	看板	n	signboard, sign, billboard, hoarding, doorplate,draw, attraction, feature, highlight, spokesman, figurehead,reputation (of a shop),appearance, look,closing time	You know the gym? You'll find a lot of people there like you. Go and talk to them.	『男男男』とかいう看板を出しとるジムがあるじゃろ？そこに、あんたと同じ趣味の人がいるんじゃ。彼に相談してみるとよいじゃろう
じむ	事務	n	office work, clerical work, administration, business, affairs	You know the gym? You'll find a lot of people there like you. Go and talk to them.	『男男男』とかいう看板を出しとるジムがあるじゃろ？そこに、あんたと同じ趣味の人がいるんじゃ。彼に相談してみるとよいじゃろう
しそ	始祖	n	founder, originator, pioneer	Thanks for showing us something new. My father's got his motivation back now, so the dress is on the house.	あんたたち。おもしろいものを見せてもらったよ。親父もやる気出してくれたしそのドレスの代金はサービスしとくよ
だいきん	代金	n	price, cost, charge, payment, bill, fee	Thanks for showing us something new. My father's got his motivation back now, so the dress is on the house.	あんたたち。おもしろいものを見せてもらったよ。親父もやる気出してくれたしそのドレスの代金はサービスしとくよ
しとやか	淑やか	adj-na	graceful, ladylike, modest, gentle, polite, quiet, well-mannered, refined (behavior)	Walk more nicely like…this, Miss CLOUD.	おしとやかに歩いてね。CLOUDちゃん
きがえる	着替える	v1	to change one's clothes	Looks like you got it. So try it on for size.	手に入ったようですね。早速着替えてみてくださいよ
マナー		n	manners, etiquette	Don't push! Hooligan!	なによ、押さないでよ。マナー悪いね
かく	斯く	adv, adj-no	like this, such, thus, in this way	Okay…I'm ready	かくごを決めた
いやいや	嫌々	int	unwillingly, grudgingly, reluctantly,shaking head in refusal (to children),no!, no no!, not at all	How about that one?	いやいや、こっちの方がいいぞ
よっつ	四つ	n	four,four years of age,ten o'clock (old time system),cross grips	Choose the BEST 'flavor' from the 4 rooms.	４つのお部屋から好きなコースを選んでね♥
コース		n	course (route, trail, course of study, course of action, plan, option),full course meal (multiple dishes served in sequence), prix fixe meal	Choose the BEST 'flavor' from the 4 rooms.	４つのお部屋から好きなコースを選んでね♥
ふみとどまる	踏みとどまる	v5r, vi	to stay on, to remain, to hold out, to hold one's ground,to stop (doing), to give up	Hold ground	ふみとどまる
かねる	兼ねる	v1, vt	to be unable to, to find difficult (unpleasant, awkward, painful) to do,to serve two or more functions or roles simultaneously, to contain (or combine) two or more features,to work in two or more jobs simultaneously (positions, etc.), to do alongside,to hesitate to do something (out of consideration for others),to think of the future (as well as the present)	I'm still trying to decide	まだ決めかねているんだ
ゆう	優	n	gentle,elegant, classy,superior, skilled,excellent (in marking, grading, etc.),actor	Oh, yes sir. (So indecisive…)	はぁ♥　はいはい♥（優じゅう不断…）
けもの	獣	n	beast, brute, animal	Oh, yes sir. (So indecisive…)	はぁ♥　はいはい♥（優じゅう不断…）
ふだん	不断	adj-no, n-t	constant, persistent, unremitting, ceaseless,indecisiveness,usual, normal, everyday, habitual, ordinary	Oh, yes sir. (So indecisive…)	はぁ♥　はいはい♥（優じゅう不断…）
ランジェリー		n	lingerie	Received "Sexy Lingerie"!	『セクシーランジェリー』を手に入れた。
ためいき	ため息	n	sigh	What's wrong, Grandpa? You keep sighing.	じいさん、なんです？ためいきばっかりついて……
ばあさん	婆さん	n	grandmother,old woman, female senior citizen	…wheez…puff… You know, Grandma…	ハァ……そやかてなぁ、ばあさん…
なんぼ	何ぼ	n	how, how much, how many, how long, how far,under no circumstances, whatever the circumstances may be, say what you like,being meaningful, being significant, having value, having worth	…whew… I know our son rented this for us and all, but…	ハァ……なんぼ息子がかりてくれたゆうてもなぁ…
ふろ	風呂	n	bath, bathtub,bathroom, bathhouse,room for drying lacquerware,base (wooden joint connecting the blade of a hoe, spade, etc., to the handle)	It's too nice for us. Big round bed, gorgeous tub, I just can't get comfortable.	わしらにこんな立派な部屋はなぁ。まるいふとんにカクカクふろわし、どうもおちつかんのやわ
ここら	此処等	pn	hereabouts, around here	Don't worry about it. It's a high class neighborhood, in the Big City.	ええんとちゃいますか。ここらは大都会の下、高級地なんですよ。ばちがあたるちゅうもんですよ
こうきゅう	高級	adj-na, n, adj-no	high class, high grade,high rank, seniority	Don't worry about it. It's a high class neighborhood, in the Big City.	ええんとちゃいますか。ここらは大都会の下、高級地なんですよ。ばちがあたるちゅうもんですよ
つとめる	勤める	v1, vt	to work (for), to be employed (at), to serve (in),to serve (as), to act (as), to fill (the position of), to play the role (of),to conduct a religious service	You keep complainin' and we'll get in trouble.	なあ、ばあさん。息子のつとめとる会社なんつうたかいのう……
ほんま	本真	adj-na, n	truth, reality	If it's the biggest company, it must be something.	ほんまに。立派なもんですわ
しゅっせ	出世	n, vs	success in life, getting ahead, successful career, promotion, climbing the corporate ladder, eminence	Yeah. It IS really something.	なんや、ようさん出世していまじゃ、部長さんやゆうてましたわ
ぶちょう	部長	n	head (chief, director) of a section or department,head of a (school) club, head of a (school) team	Yeah. It IS really something.	なんや、ようさん出世していまじゃ、部長さんやゆうてましたわ
やゆ	揶揄	n, vs	banter, raillery, ridicule, teasing, making fun of	Yeah. It IS really something.	なんや、ようさん出世していまじゃ、部長さんやゆうてましたわ
ほる	彫る	v5r, vt	to carve, to engrave, to sculpt, to chisel,to tattoo	He's doing well, and he told me that he's been promoted to department head.	ほう……。わしらがこんな部屋住めんのも息子がえろなったからやのう
やむ	止む	v5m, vi	to cease, to stop, to be over	…The wind's calm now…	……風がやんだ……
よみがえる	蘇る	v5r, vi	to be resurrected, to be resuscitated, to be rehabilitated, to be revived, to be refreshed, to be restored,to be recalled (e.g. memories), to be brought back	It's the curse of the resurrected Satan…	よみがえりし魔王の呪いか…
まおう	魔王	n	devil king	It's the curse of the resurrected Satan…	よみがえりし魔王の呪いか…
のろい	呪い	n	curse, spell, malediction	It's the curse of the resurrected Satan…	よみがえりし魔王の呪いか…
さいあい	最愛	adj-no, n	beloved, dearest	Our beloved Queen does not awaken…	我が最愛の女王は目覚めぬ……
じょおう	女王	n, adj-no	queen	Our beloved Queen does not awaken…	我が最愛の女王は目覚めぬ……
めざめる	目覚める	v1, vi	to wake up, to awake,to awaken to (instinct, ability, perception, etc.), to become aware of, to become conscious of, to realize,to come to one's senses	Our beloved Queen does not awaken…	我が最愛の女王は目覚めぬ……
つたわる	伝わる	v5r, vi	to be handed down, to be introduced, to be transmitted, to be circulated, to go along, to walk along	A legend has been passed on through generations…	『…古代よりかの地に伝わる伝説…』
でんせつ	伝説	n	tradition, legend, folklore	A legend has been passed on through generations…	『…古代よりかの地に伝わる伝説…』
もとめる	求める	v1, vt	to want, to wish for,to request, to demand,to seek, to search for, to pursue (pleasure), to hunt (a job),to purchase, to buy	…they sought the Promised Land…	……求めるは、約束の地……
ひとみ	瞳	n	pupil (of eye),eye	…one with blue eyes…	……青きひとみもつもの……
はくじん	白刃	n	drawn sword, naked sword	…and a great white sword on his back…	……白刃の大剣を背に……
けん	剣	n	sword (originally esp. a doubled-edged sword), sabre, saber, blade,bayonet,swordsmanship,stinger, ovipositor, dart	…and a great white sword on his back…	……白刃の大剣を背に……
せい	背	n	height, stature	…and a great white sword on his back…	……白刃の大剣を背に……
みちびく	導く	v5k, vt	to guide, to lead, to show the way, to conduct,to derive, to deduce	…will not lead us to the Promised Land…	……約束の地へ導かん……
はめつ	破滅	n, vs	ruin, destruction, fall	…annihilation…	……破滅……
ほうかい	崩壊	n, vs	collapse, crumbling, breaking down, caving in,(radioactive) decay, disintegration	…destruction…	……崩壊……
とめる	止める	v1, vt	to stop, to turn off,to park,to prevent, to suppress (a cough), to hold back (tears), to hold (one's breath), to relieve (pain),to stop (someone from doing something), to dissuade, to forbid, to prohibit,to notice, to be aware of, to concentrate on, to pay attention to, to remember, to bear in mind,to fix (in place), to fasten, to tack, to pin, to nail, to button, to staple,to detain, to keep in custody	Psst… (Hey, shouldn't we stop him soon?)	ひそひそ……（おい、そろそろ止めないとまずいんじゃないのかい？）
しゅっちょう	出張	n, vs	official tour, business trip	Psst… (This happens every time we come to Midgar on business.)	ひそひそ……（ミッドガルに出張のときは毎度だぜ。ゴールドソーサーからはるばる来てよ…）
まいど	毎度	n-adv, n-t	each time, always, often,thank you for your continued patronage	Psst… (This happens every time we come to Midgar on business.)	ひそひそ……（ミッドガルに出張のときは毎度だぜ。ゴールドソーサーからはるばる来てよ…）
はるばる	遙々	adv	from afar, over a great distance, all the way	Psst… (This happens every time we come to Midgar on business.)	ひそひそ……（ミッドガルに出張のときは毎度だぜ。ゴールドソーサーからはるばる来てよ…）
しょうめい	照明	n, vs, adj-no	illumination, lighting	Psst… (What're you complaining about? You're just holding the lights. I've gotta wear this heavy armor!)	ひそひそ……（おまえはまだいいよ、照明係なんだから。俺なんてこのヨロイ！すげえ重いんだぞぅ）
かかり	係	n	charge, duty, person in charge, official, clerk,connection, linking	Psst… (What're you complaining about? You're just holding the lights. I've gotta wear this heavy armor!)	ひそひそ……（おまえはまだいいよ、照明係なんだから。俺なんてこのヨロイ！すげえ重いんだぞぅ）
はいはい	這い這い	n, vs	creeping, crawling	Psst… (I know, I know… but it's all part of the job.)	ひそひそ……（ハイハイ……これも仕事ですから）
おうさま	王様	n	king	Psst… (Oh yeah, did you hear? The President's wife found out about this little hobby of his.)	ひそひそ……（そういや、聞いたかい？社長の王様道楽が奥さんにばれたって話）
おくさん	奥さん	n	wife, your wife, his wife, married lady, madam	Psst… (Oh yeah, did you hear? The President's wife found out about this little hobby of his.)	ひそひそ……（そういや、聞いたかい？社長の王様道楽が奥さんにばれたって話）
はつみみ	初耳	n	something heard for the first time, hearing something for the first time	Psst… (Ha, ha…no way, I didn't know that.)	ひそひそ……（クックッ……うそ、それ初耳）
おいおい		adv, adv-to	Hey!, Wait a minute!, Whoa!,boohoo, waaaa	Psst… (Oh man, not again!?)	ひそひそ……（おいおい、またかよ！！）
むだ	無駄	n, adj-na	futility, waste, uselessness, pointlessness, idleness	Cut the small talk	むだ口はやめてくれ
まちかねる	待ちかねる	v1, vt	to wait impatiently for	Come on, everyone's waiting.	さ、みなさん、おまちかねですから
ニコニコ		adv, adv-to, vs	with a friendly grin, smilingly	(Smile, smile, smile…)	（にこにこにこにこ……にんまり）
にんまり		adv, adv-to, vs	with a complacent smile, with a smile of satisfaction	(Smile, smile, smile…)	（にこにこにこにこ……にんまり）
ぜつめい	絶命	n, vs	end of life, death, annihilation	Looks like I'm always going to be facing crises all my life…	どうやら、俺は絶対絶命の危機におちいってるようだな…
きき	危機	n	crisis, critical situation, emergency, pinch	Looks like I'm always going to be facing crises all my life…	どうやら、俺は絶対絶命の危機におちいってるようだな…
おちいる	陥る	v5r, vi	to fall into (e.g. a hole),to fall into (chaos, depression, dilemma, illness, etc.),to fall into (a trap, etc.),to fall, to surrender, to capitulate	Looks like I'm always going to be facing crises all my life…	どうやら、俺は絶対絶命の危機におちいってるようだな…
こなし	熟し	n	carriage (e.g. of one's body)	Don't be so embarrassed! Loosen up, bubby!	照れちゃだめだ！　照れちゃ！かたいことはいいっこなしだ、ぼうず！
ともに	共に	adv	together, jointly,at the same time, with, as ..., including, along with,both	Let's wash off all our sweat and dirt together!	ともに青春のアカとアセを流そうではないか！
せいしゅん	青春	n, adj-no	youth, springtime of life, adolescent	Let's wash off all our sweat and dirt together!	ともに青春のアカとアセを流そうではないか！
あか	垢	n	dirt, filth, grime,account (e.g. online service)	Let's wash off all our sweat and dirt together!	ともに青春のアカとアセを流そうではないか！
やすらぐ	安らぐ	v5g, vi	to feel at ease	It soothes you.	心がやすらぐなあ
かぞえる	数える	v1, vt	to count, to enumerate	You'll get used to it. Try counting to ten.	がまん、がまん。１０数えるまでだめだ
サークル		n	group with a common interest (e.g. students), club (e.g. company sports club), circle,circle (shape)	Do you wanna join my 'Young bubby's' group?	ムッキーの青春サークルに入らないかい？
たいよう	太陽	n	sun	We have a trip planned at a cabin out in the country.	これから、太陽のふりそそぐ国での合宿もあるんだけど
ふりそそぐ	降り注ぐ	v5g, vi	to rain incessantly, to downpour	We have a trip planned at a cabin out in the country.	これから、太陽のふりそそぐ国での合宿もあるんだけど
くに	国	n	country, state,region,national government, central government,home (i.e. hometown, home country),province (of Japan),land, earth	We have a trip planned at a cabin out in the country.	これから、太陽のふりそそぐ国での合宿もあるんだけど
がっしゅく	合宿	n, vs	lodging together, training camp, boarding house	We have a trip planned at a cabin out in the country.	これから、太陽のふりそそぐ国での合宿もあるんだけど
きねん	記念	n, vs	commemoration, celebration, honoring the memory of something, turning something into a memento, memory	Here's a memento of our time together!	今日の記念にぼうずにあげよう！
ビキニ		n	bikini (swimwear),Bikini island	Received Key Item "Bikini briefs"!	キーアイテム『ビキニパンツ』を手にいれた！
パンツ		n	underpants, pants, briefs, panties, shorts, knickers,trousers (esp. women's), jodhpurs, breeches, pants, trunks (e.g. swimming)	Received Key Item "Bikini briefs"!	キーアイテム『ビキニパンツ』を手にいれた！
はく	掃く	v5k, vt	to sweep, to brush, to clean,to gather silkworms	This is SOME underwear… I'm supposed to wear this?	すごいパンツだな……これを俺がはくのか……
かかえる	抱える	v1, vt	to hold or carry under or in the arms,to have (esp. problems, debts, etc.),to employ, to engage, to hire	You think problems go away by just thinkin' about them?	『いつでも頭かかえてれば間題が解決するとでも思ってる？』
だい	題	n-suf, ctr	title, subject, theme, topic,problem (on a test), question,counter for questions (on a test)	You think problems go away by just thinkin' about them?	『いつでも頭かかえてれば間題が解決するとでも思ってる？』
かいけつ	解決	n, vs	settlement, solution, resolution	You think problems go away by just thinkin' about them?	『いつでも頭かかえてれば間題が解決するとでも思ってる？』
とおく	遠く	adj-no, n-adv, n	far away, distant, at a distance, distant place, by far	You can't change anything by just sitting back and looking at it.	『遠くからながめてるだけじゃなにも変わらないって気づいたんだろ』
ながめる	眺める	v1, vt	to look at, to gaze at, to watch, to stare at,to look out over, to get a view of, to admire (e.g. the scenery),to look on (from the sidelines), to stand by and watch, to observe	You can't change anything by just sitting back and looking at it.	『遠くからながめてるだけじゃなにも変わらないって気づいたんだろ』
きづく	気づく	v5k, vi	to notice, to recognize, to recognise, to become aware of, to perceive, to realize, to realise	You can't change anything by just sitting back and looking at it.	『遠くからながめてるだけじゃなにも変わらないって気づいたんだろ』
ずる		v5r, vt	to slide, to slip off, to get dislocated,to drag, to pull	Bubby!! I heard you collapsed.	ぼうずっ！！倒れちゃったんだって？
おわび	お詫び	n, vs	apology	For your inconvenience, Please take this, okay?	これ、おわびのしるし♥大切にあつかってね
しるし	印	n	mark, sign,symbol, emblem,badge, crest, flag,evidence, proof,token (of gratitude, affection, etc.)	For your inconvenience, Please take this, okay?	これ、おわびのしるし♥大切にあつかってね
あつかう	扱う	v5u, vt	to deal with (a person), to treat, to handle, to take care of, to entertain,to deal with (a problem), to handle, to manage,to operate (e.g. a machine), to handle, to work,to deal in, to sell,to cover (a topic), to treat, to discuss, to take up,to treat A as B,to mediate (an argument),to be too much for one, to find unmanageable,to gossip	For your inconvenience, Please take this, okay?	これ、おわびのしるし♥大切にあつかってね
おちこむ	落ち込む	v5m, vi	to feel down, to feel sad, to be depressed, to be in low spirits,to be in a slump (business, economy, etc.), to be in an unfavourable condition,to fall into (e.g. a hole)	Don't get depressed over a thing like this.	こんなことで落ちこんでちゃいけないぞ
しょっちゅう		adv	always, constantly, frequently, often	It happens to me all the time.	おじさんなんかしょっちゅうなんだから
エッチ	Ｈ	n	H, h,indecent, lewd, frisky, sexy,sexual intercourse, copulation,nth year in the Heisei era (1989.1.8-),hydrogen (H)	(Yuk…a pervert…)	（いやだわ……エッチなお客さん…）
ショック		n	shock (psychological),shock (physical, mechanical),shock (e.g. due to lack of blood flow)	NO WAY! I'M SO SHOCKED!!	ガーン！　ショック！！
ハード		n	hard, tough,hardware,hard disk	Phew…… …it's so tiring.	ハァハァ……。……ハードだわ
さいのう	才能	n	talent, ability	Hmph!! Listen you, not that you care, but you sure know how to make people mad.	フン……！！あなた、どうでもいいけど人を怒らせる才能あるかもよ
デリカシー		n	delicacy, tact, considerateness, sensitivity, thoughtfulness	(Oh God…here's another one of those guys. You know, the delicate type. Just ignore him, just ignore him.)	（やだ……ときどきいるのよね。こういう、デリカシーのない男…。無視無視）
むし	無視	n, vs	disregarding, ignoring	(Oh God…here's another one of those guys. You know, the delicate type. Just ignore him, just ignore him.)	（やだ……ときどきいるのよね。こういう、デリカシーのない男…。無視無視）
たちば	立場	n	position, situation,viewpoint, standpoint, point of view	(Hmm! I guess he doesn't realize his position. I feel sorry for him. Just ignore him, just ignore him.)	（フン……！自分の立場がわかってないのね。みじめな男、もう完全に無視無視）
みじめ	惨め	adj-na	miserable, wretched, unhappy, sad, pitiable	(Hmm! I guess he doesn't realize his position. I feel sorry for him. Just ignore him, just ignore him.)	（フン……！自分の立場がわかってないのね。みじめな男、もう完全に無視無視）
かんぜん	完全	adj-na, n, adj-no	perfect, complete	(Hmm! I guess he doesn't realize his position. I feel sorry for him. Just ignore him, just ignore him.)	（フン……！自分の立場がわかってないのね。みじめな男、もう完全に無視無視）
のら	野良	n-pref	field, farm,rural, agricultural,stray (e.g. dog, cat),unauthorised (esp. smartphone application)	(God, what a pest! All right, get out of here! You dog…)	（しっ、しつこいわね！ハイ！　あっち、いって！野良イヌ男……
ぽち	点	suf	dot, point, mark,tip, gratuity,a little, paltry, piddling, mere	(That's it, I'll name him 'pooch'.)	（そうだ、名前はポチにしましょう！）
かき	柿	n	kaki, Japanese persimmon (Diospyros kaki)	Mix, mix, mix……	かきかきかきかき……
かえりみち	帰り道	n	the way back, the way home, return trip	(What should I do? Is he following me? Really? What if he follows me home?)	（どうしましょう……。つきまとわれている？　わたし？帰り道にまちぶせとかされたら…
まちぶせる	待ち伏せる	v1	to ambush	(What should I do? Is he following me? Really? What if he follows me home?)	（どうしましょう……。つきまとわれている？　わたし？帰り道にまちぶせとかされたら…
とかす	溶かす	v5s, vt	to dissolve,to melt	(What should I do? Is he following me? Really? What if he follows me home?)	（どうしましょう……。つきまとわれている？　わたし？帰り道にまちぶせとかされたら…
いろ	色	n	colour, color, hue, tint, tinge, shade,complexion, skin colour, skin color,look (on one's face), expression,appearance, air, feeling,personality, character,tone (of one's voice, etc.), tune, sound, ring,love, lust, sensuality, love affair,lover, paramour,beauty, sexiness, physical appeal,kind, type, variety	(You think he's after me? Really? This guy makes me sick… And his eyes are weird, too…)	（ねらわれている？　わたし？この男、気持ち悪い……。目の色とか変だし
きずつける	傷つける	v1, vt	to wound, to injure,to hurt someone's feelings (pride, etc.),to damage, to chip, to scratch	(Yeah, don't hurt these guys' feelings. Let's at least say 'hi' to him.)	（そうね、こういう男は、傷つけちゃダメ。あいさつだけでもしてあげましょ）
おてんき	お天気	n	weather,temper, mood	What a nice day, today.	今日は、いいお天気ね
こしょう	故障	n, vs	breakdown, failure, fault, accident, out of order,damage, hurt,objection, protest	Introduce yourself	じこしょうかいする
かいする	介する	vs-s, vt	to use as an intermediary,to worry, to mind, to care	Introduce yourself	じこしょうかいする
ばいばい	売買	n, vs	trade, buying and selling, trafficking (e.g. of humans, arms, drugs), dealing	BYE!! (Phew…I'm safe now…)	バイバイ！！（フッ～♥たすかった…）
けし	芥子	n	poppy (Papaver somniferum)	Have them make me up	けしょうしてもらう
しょう	章	n	chapter, section,medal	I have a favor to ask of you. Can you put makeup on me, too?	たのみがあるんだ。俺にもけしょうをしてくれないか
しらせる	知らせる	v1, vt	to notify, to advise, to inform	I'll go and let the Don know you're here. Wait here. Don't wander around…	いまドンにしらせてくるからさ。ここで待っててくんな。ウロウロしないでくれよ
てく		v5k-s, aux-v	to continue	I'll go and let the Don know you're here. Wait here. Don't wander around…	いまドンにしらせてくるからさ。ここで待っててくんな。ウロウロしないでくれよ
うろうろ		adv, adv-to, vs	loiteringly, aimless wandering, restlessly	I'll go and let the Don know you're here. Wait here. Don't wander around…	いまドンにしらせてくるからさ。ここで待っててくんな。ウロウロしないでくれよ
かね	鐘	n	bell (often a large hanging bell), chime	The Don's waiting in his room…  Ha ha ha…	ドンがこの部屋でお待ちかねだよ。ヘヘヘ……
オフィス		n	office	Office of	ドン・コルネオのオフィス
きんずる	禁ずる	vz, vt	to forbid, to suppress	Keep Out!	立ち入りを禁ず
おしおき	お仕置き	n, vs	punishment, spanking, smacking, chastisement, scolding	Torture Room	おしおき部屋
こうえん	公園	n	(public) park	Hey you're the one with CLOUD in the park…	あっ、公園にいた人？CLOUDといっしょに……
しりあう	知り合う	v5u, vi	to get to know (someone), to make acquaintance	Don't worry. We just met. It's nothing.	安心して。少し前に知り合ったばかりよ。なんでもないの
いっぺんに	一遍に	adv	at one time, all at once, in one sitting	Slow down, let me answer.	そんなにいっぺんに質間するな
みみ	耳	n	ear,hearing,edge, crust,selvedge (non-fray machined edge of fabrics), selvage	Ahem!! I'll just plug my ears.	オホン！わたし、耳、ふさいでるね
ふさぐ	塞ぐ	v5g, vi	to stop up, to close up, to block (up), to plug up, to shut up, to cover (ears, eyes, etc.), to close (eyes, mouth),to stand in the way, to obstruct,to occupy, to fill up, to take up,to perform one's role, to do one's duty,to feel depressed, to be in low spirits, to mope	Ahem!! I'll just plug my ears.	オホン！わたし、耳、ふさいでるね
うろつく	彷徨く	v5k, vi	to loiter, to putter, to prowl, to wander aimlessly, to knock around, to hang around,to be confused from not knowing what to do	When we got back from the Sector 5 reactor, we saw a weird man.	五番魔晄炉からもどったら怪しい男がうろついていたのよ
しめて	締めて	adv	in all, all told	BARRET caught him and squeezed some information out of him.	その男をBARRETがつかまえてキューッとしめて話を聞き出したの
ききだす	聞き出す	v5s, vt	to get information out of a person,to begin listening	BARRET caught him and squeezed some information out of him.	その男をBARRETがつかまえてキューッとしめて話を聞き出したの
あく	悪	n	evil, wickedness	BARRET told me to leave the lech alone…	BARRETはコルネオなんて小悪堂だから放っておけって言うんだけど……
どう	堂	n, n-suf, n-pref	temple, shrine, chapel,hall,company,front room	BARRET told me to leave the lech alone…	BARRETはコルネオなんて小悪堂だから放っておけって言うんだけど……
じしん	自身	n, n-suf	(one's) self, oneself	I see. So you wanted the story straight from Corneo's mouth.	わかったよ。コルネオ自身から話を聞こうってわけだな
なし	無し	n	without,unacceptable, not alright, unsatisfactory	If you know the three girls, there's no problem, right?	３人の女の子が全員あなたの仲間だったら間題ナシ、じゃないかな？
まきこむ	巻き込む	v5m, vt	to roll up, to enfold, to swallow up,to involve, to drag into	No, AERIS! I can't involve you.	ダメだ、AERIS！あんたを巻きこむわけにはいかない
そだち	育ち	n	breeding, growth	I grew up in the slums… I'm used to danger.	わたし、スラム育ちだから危険なこと、なれてるの
ねえちゃん	姉ちゃん	n	elder sister, girl	It's time, ladies. The Don is waiting!	お姉ちゃんたち、時間だよ。コルネオ様がおまちかねだ！
テレ		n	tele,Terret (wine grape variety)	Embarrassed? Come on, speak up!	な～に、テレてるの？ダメ、ちゃんと話さないと！
ども	共	suf	first-person plural (or singular),second or third person plural (implies speaker is of higher status than those referred to)	All right, ladies!	よ～し娘ども！
せいれつ	整列	n, vs	standing in a row, forming a line, alignment	Line up in front of the Don!	ドン・コルネオの前に整列するのだぁ！
ひる	干る	v1, vi	to dry	Hmmm! Good, splendid!	ほひ～！いいの～、いいの～！
けつ	決	n	decision, vote	Woo-hoo, I've made up my mind!!	ほひ～！！決めた決～めた！
ほそる	細る	v5r, vi	to get thin, to taper off	This slender little girl!	このほそっこいおなごだ！
ほねぶと	骨太	adj-no, adj-na, n	big-boned, sturdily built, stout,solid (plan, storyline, etc.)	This healthy-looking girl!	この骨太のおなごだ！
こばむ	拒む	v5m, vt	to refuse, to reject, to decline,to prevent (from doing), to deny (e.g. access), to block	I love chickies who play hard-to-get! Yeowza!	そのこばむしぐさがういの～、うぶいの～
しぐさ	仕草	n	gesture, movement, action, behavior, behaviour, bearing, mannerism,acting, performance	I love chickies who play hard-to-get! Yeowza!	そのこばむしぐさがういの～、うぶいの～
いただき	頂	n	crown (of head), summit (of mountain), spire,easy win for one,something received	Yes, sir! Thank you sir!	ヘイ！！いただきやっす！
いらくさ	刺草	n	nettle (Urtica thunbergiana)	Slow down, what's the hurry? Why don't you stick around? We'll treat you real nice!	そういそがないでもっとオイラたちとたのしもうぜェ～
たのしむ	楽しむ	v5m	to enjoy (oneself)	Slow down, what's the hurry? Why don't you stick around? We'll treat you real nice!	そういそがないでもっとオイラたちとたのしもうぜェ～
っぷり		suf	manner, style	We'll take REAL good care of you.	た～っぷりとかわいがってやんな
ビッグ		adj-na, n	big	This is all thanks to the big boss, Don Corneo!	これもみなビッグなドン・コルネオのおかげだぞ！
ちり	地理	n	geography	Hey…you're in pretty good shape. Lookit your tight little bod…	あんた、なかなかいいカラダしてるねェ。こう、ムッチリと……
おどる	踊る	v5r, vi	to dance (orig. a hopping dance)	Come on, dance with me, beautiful. They say if two people dance together, their hearts will become one…	さあ、おどりましょうおじょうさん。２人でステップをふめば身も心もひとつに……
ステップ		n	step,steppe	Come on, dance with me, beautiful. They say if two people dance together, their hearts will become one…	さあ、おどりましょうおじょうさん。２人でステップをふめば身も心もひとつに……
キュート		adj-na	cute	Woo-hoo! I gots ants in my pants wanna do a dance, gotta take a chance, and mebbe find romance!	オマエのハートはキュートでタイトグッドなビートでヒートアップ！
タイト		adj-na, n	tight	Woo-hoo! I gots ants in my pants wanna do a dance, gotta take a chance, and mebbe find romance!	オマエのハートはキュートでタイトグッドなビートでヒートアップ！
グッド		adj-na, n	good	Woo-hoo! I gots ants in my pants wanna do a dance, gotta take a chance, and mebbe find romance!	オマエのハートはキュートでタイトグッドなビートでヒートアップ！
ビート		n	beet,beat	Woo-hoo! I gots ants in my pants wanna do a dance, gotta take a chance, and mebbe find romance!	オマエのハートはキュートでタイトグッドなビートでヒートアップ！
ニヤニヤ		adv, adv-to, vs	grinning, smirking	…leer…snicker…	ニヤニヤ……
ダラシ		n	dalasi	Grr! C'mon, what's the matter with you good-for-nothings!?	ク～！！だらしないヤツらめ！
いじ	意地	n, adj-no	stubbornness, obstinacy, willpower, pride,disposition, nature,appetite, desire, greed	All right now, COME ON! I'll show you how it's done!!	い、いくぞ！手下の意地を見せてやる！！
あったりまえ	当ったり前	adj-na, n, adj-no	natural, reasonable, obvious,usual, common, ordinary	Of course! If you take me lightly, you're gonna pay for it!!	あったりまえ！私をアマく見るとイタいめにあうんだから！！
てん	天	n	sky,heaven,svarga (heaven-like realm visited as a stage of death and rebirth),deva (divine being of Buddhism)	Of course! If you take me lightly, you're gonna pay for it!!	あったりまえ！私をアマく見るとイタいめにあうんだから！！
こいびと	恋人	n	lover, sweetheart, boyfriend, girlfriend	I just wanted to act like I got a a cute girl…	カワイイ女の子とスウィ～トな恋人どうしを演じてみたかっただけなのに……
どうし	同志	n	like-mindedness, (being of the) same mind, shared sentiment,comrade, fellow, kindred soul	I just wanted to act like I got a a cute girl…	カワイイ女の子とスウィ～トな恋人どうしを演じてみたかっただけなのに……
えんじる	演じる	v1, vt	to perform (a play), to play (a part), to act (a part), to commit (a blunder)	I just wanted to act like I got a a cute girl…	カワイイ女の子とスウィ～トな恋人どうしを演じてみたかっただけなのに……
キュー		n	queue,cue, cue stick	Just once!	キュー！！
てめえ	手前	pn	you,oneself	Hey! You're…not them… you're…	あ！てめえ……じゃなかったあなたは！
がらん	伽藍	n-suf	temple (esp. large one), monastery,temple building	Come, come, don't be so shy…	これこれ、そんなにはずかしがらんで……もっと近くへ、な？
てとり	手取り	n	talented wrestler,good at manipulating (others), crafty person	Of course, my dear. I'll take you through it slowly, step by step. So come on!	おお、教えてやるぞ。手取り足取り、じっくりとな。ホレ！　ホレホレ！
あしどり	足取り	n	gait, walk, stride, pace, step, manner of walking,trace (e.g. of route taken by hunted criminal), track, trail, movements	Of course, my dear. I'll take you through it slowly, step by step. So come on!	おお、教えてやるぞ。手取り足取り、じっくりとな。ホレ！　ホレホレ！
じっくり		adv, adv-to	deliberately, carefully, thoroughly, without rushing	Of course, my dear. I'll take you through it slowly, step by step. So come on!	おお、教えてやるぞ。手取り足取り、じっくりとな。ホレ！　ホレホレ！
ほれる	惚れる	v1, vi	to fall in love, to be in love, to be charmed with, to lose one's heart to	Of course, my dear. I'll take you through it slowly, step by step. So come on!	おお、教えてやるぞ。手取り足取り、じっくりとな。ホレ！　ホレホレ！
きかせる	利かせる	v1, vt	to season (with salt, etc.), to bring out taste,to use, to exercise, to display	But you know, Don Corneo, I'd like you to explain something before we start…	でもねドン・コルネオ。その前にひとつだけきかせて……
なにもの	何者	n	who, what kind of person	…What the hell? Who's there?	ほひ～。なんだ、なんだ！　何者だ！
さぐる	探る	v5r, vt	to feel around for, to fumble for, to grope for, to search for, to look for,to investigate, to probe into, to spy on, to sound out,to explore (parts unknown), to enjoy (natural beauty)	What did your assistants find out? Talk! If you don't tell us…	手下に何をさぐらせてたの？言いなさい！　言わないと……
きりおとす	切り落とす	v5s, vt	to cut off, to lop off, to prune	…I'll chop it off.	……切り落とすぞ
かたうで	片腕	n	one arm,right-hand man	…I made 'em find out where the man with the gun-arm was. But that's what I was ordered to do.	……片腕が銃の男のねぐらを探させたんだ。そういう依頼があったんだ
じゅう	銃	n	gun, rifle, small arms	…I made 'em find out where the man with the gun-arm was. But that's what I was ordered to do.	……片腕が銃の男のねぐらを探させたんだ。そういう依頼があったんだ
ねぐら	塒	n	roost, nest,pad, crib, one's home	…I made 'em find out where the man with the gun-arm was. But that's what I was ordered to do.	……片腕が銃の男のねぐらを探させたんだ。そういう依頼があったんだ
いらい	依頼	n, vs	request, commission, entrusting (with a matter),dependence, reliance	…I made 'em find out where the man with the gun-arm was. But that's what I was ordered to do.	……片腕が銃の男のねぐらを探させたんだ。そういう依頼があったんだ
しゃべる	喋る	v5r, vi	to talk, to chat, to chatter	No--! If I told you that, I'd be killed!	ほひ～！しゃべったら殺される！
ころす	殺す	v5s, vt	to kill	No--! If I told you that, I'd be killed!	ほひ～！しゃべったら殺される！
ねじる	捩る	v5r, vt	to screw, to twist,to distort, to parody, to make a pun,to torture, to wrest	…I'll rip it off.	……ねじり切っちゃうわよ
ちあん	治安	n	public order	Heidegger, the head of Peace Preservation!	治安維持部門総括ハイデッカーだ！
いじ	維持	n, vs	maintenance, preservation, improvement	Heidegger, the head of Peace Preservation!	治安維持部門総括ハイデッカーだ！
ぶもん	部門	n, adj-no	division (of a larger group), branch, field, class (subclass), group, category, department	Heidegger, the head of Peace Preservation!	治安維持部門総括ハイデッカーだ！
そうかつ	総括	n, vs	summarization, summary, generalization,review (by labour or political movements of past activities, results, etc.)	Heidegger, the head of Peace Preservation!	治安維持部門総括ハイデッカーだ！
ほんき	本気	n, adj-no, adj-na	seriousness, earnestness, truth, sanctity	…You're serious, aren't you… …ohboy, ohbooy, ohboy.	ほひ……ねえちゃん……本気だな。……えらいえらい
つぶす	潰す	v5s, vt	to smash, to crush, to flatten,to shut down, to put out of business, to force (a company) to close up shop,to wreck, to break, to block, to thwart,to butcher, to slaughter, to kill (livestock, for food),to kill (time), to while away (the time),to waste (e.g. talents)	Shinra's trying to crush a small rebel group called AVALANCHE, and want to infiltrate their hideout.	神羅はアバランチとかいうちっこいウラ組織をつぶすつもりだ。アジトもろともな
モロ		adv	Moro, [object Object],conspicuously, openly,completely, entirely, perfectly, wonderfully	Shinra's trying to crush a small rebel group called AVALANCHE, and want to infiltrate their hideout.	神羅はアバランチとかいうちっこいウラ組織をつぶすつもりだ。アジトもろともな
もじどおり	文字通り	n-adv	literal,literally	And they're really going to crush them…literally. By breaking the supports holding up the plate above them.	文字どおり、つぶしちまうんだ。プレートを支える柱を壊してよ
もちろん	勿論	adv	of course, certainly, naturally	Of course, TIFA.	もちろんだ。TIFA
べらべら		adj-na, adv, n, vs	non-stop talking, speaking indiscreetly, chattering,thin, flimsy	Why do you think scum like me babbled on about the truth?	俺たちみたいな悪堂が、こうやってべらべらとホントのことをしゃべるのはどんなときだと思う？
し	死	n	death, decease,death penalty (by strangulation or decapitation),(an) out	Because I've given up on life	１　死をかくごしたとき
しょうり	勝利	n, vs	victory, triumph, conquest, success, win	Because I'm sure I'll win	２　勝利を確信しているとき
かくしん	確信	n, vs	conviction, belief, confidence	Because I'm sure I'll win	２　勝利を確信しているとき
こねこ	子猫	n	kitten	All right, pussycat… Come to daddy!!	さあコネコちゃん……俺のムネへカモ～ン！
かも	鴨	n	duck,easy mark, sucker, sitting duck	All right, pussycat… Come to daddy!!	さあコネコちゃん……俺のムネへカモ～ン！
もらす	漏らす	v5s, vt	to let leak, to reveal,to wet one's pants,to give utterance, to vent, to express,to omit, to leave out	Because I'm gonna need that mouth of yours to give me some information!!	あんたのその口は情報をもらすのに使ってもらうからさ！！
こぶん	子分	n	henchman, follower,adopted child	Unfortunately, no one'll be comin' to help.	おあいにくさま。あなたの子分はだれもこられないみたいよ
めいれい	命令	n, vs	order, command, decree, directive,(software) instruction, statement	I…I was just following the Don's orders! Help me!	オ、オレはただ、ドンの命令にしたがっただけなんだ！助けてくれよ！
リーク		n	leak,leek (edible plant, Allium porrum)	You know what? After you left, some Shinra guys forced themselves in here saying someone 'leaked information' and we're 'good for nothings'.	じつはあのあと、神羅の連中がドカドカやってきて『情報をリークした』だの『役立たず』だの……
やくだつ	役立つ	v5t, vi	to be useful, to be helpful, to serve the purpose	You know what? After you left, some Shinra guys forced themselves in here saying someone 'leaked information' and we're 'good for nothings'.	じつはあのあと、神羅の連中がドカドカやってきて『情報をリークした』だの『役立たず』だの……
ムード		n	mood	Turtle's Paradise No. 2 One thing even the Gold Saucer doesn't have is… A good place for drinks with a great atmosphere! Come on by and see us at "Turtle's Paradise"	【かめ道楽　通信】ナンバー２ゴールドソーサーにただひとつ、たりないもの……それはおいしいお酒とムードのある居酒屋！ぜひいちど居酒屋『かめ道楽』へ！！