じゅんちょう	順調	adj-na, n	favourable, favorable, doing well, OK, all right	Gya, haa, haa!!  Smoothly, very smoothly! I assigned the Turks to this.	ガハハ！！　順調順調！実行部隊はタークスです
ぶたい	部隊	n	force, unit, corps, echelon, element	Gya, haa, haa!!  Smoothly, very smoothly! I assigned the Turks to this.	ガハハ！！　順調順調！実行部隊はタークスです
せきにん	責任	n	duty, responsibility (incl. supervision of staff),liability, onus	But, as head of the Urban Development Department, I have been involved in the building and running of Midgar. That's why…	しかし、私は都市開発責任者としてミッドガルの建造、運営のすべてにかかわってきました。ですから……
けんぞう	建造	n, vs	building, construction	But, as head of the Urban Development Department, I have been involved in the building and running of Midgar. That's why…	しかし、私は都市開発責任者としてミッドガルの建造、運営のすべてにかかわってきました。ですから……
うんえい	運営	n, vs	management, administration, operation	But, as head of the Urban Development Department, I have been involved in the building and running of Midgar. That's why…	しかし、私は都市開発責任者としてミッドガルの建造、運営のすべてにかかわってきました。ですから……
かかわる	関わる	v5r, vi	to be affected, to be influenced,to be concerned with, to have to do with,to stick to (opinions)	But, as head of the Urban Development Department, I have been involved in the building and running of Midgar. That's why…	しかし、私は都市開発責任者としてミッドガルの建造、運営のすべてにかかわってきました。ですから……
こじん	個人	n, adj-no	individual, private person, personal, private	Reeve, flush your personal problems with the rest of your crap!	リーブ、そういう個人的な間題は朝のうちにトイレで流しちまうんだな！
トイレ		n	toilet, restroom, bathroom, lavatory	Reeve, flush your personal problems with the rest of your crap!	リーブ、そういう個人的な間題は朝のうちにトイレで流しちまうんだな！
ながす	流す	v5s, vt	to drain, to pour, to spill, to shed (blood, tears),to wash away,to distribute (e.g. electricity over wires, music over a PA system, etc.), to circulate, to broadcast, to beam,to cruise (e.g. taxi),to float, to set adrift,to call off (a meeting, etc.),to exile, to banish	Reeve, flush your personal problems with the rest of your crap!	リーブ、そういう個人的な間題は朝のうちにトイレで流しちまうんだな！
はんたい	反対	n, adj-no	opposition, resistance, antagonism, hostility, objection, dissent,reverse, opposite, inverse, contrary	The Mayor's against this anyway…	市長も反対しているわけであり……
ぼそぼそ		adj-na, adv, n, vs, adv-to	dry and crumbling,whispering, subdued, murmuring, muttering,tasteless, flavorless, flavourless	He just sits in this building all day feeding his face! You still call that a Mayor?	このビルの中でボソボソとメシをくってるあいつか！？あいつを、まだ市長と呼ぶのか？
りょこう	旅行	n, vs	travel, trip, journey, excursion, tour	You're tired. Why don't you take a couple of days off and go somewhere.	君はつかれているんだよ。休暇をとって旅行でも行ってなさい
しわざ	仕業	n	deed (esp. negative), act, action, one's doing	We'll destroy Sector 7 and report that AVALANCHE did it. Then we'll send in the rescue operation, care of Shinra, Inc…. Heh, heh, heh…this is perfect.	７番街を破壊する。アバランチの仕業として報道する。神羅カンパニーによる救助活動。フフフ……かんぺきだ
ほうどう	報道	vs	information, report, journalism, news,to report	We'll destroy Sector 7 and report that AVALANCHE did it. Then we'll send in the rescue operation, care of Shinra, Inc…. Heh, heh, heh…this is perfect.	７番街を破壊する。アバランチの仕業として報道する。神羅カンパニーによる救助活動。フフフ……かんぺきだ
きゅうじょ	救助	n, vs	relief, aid, rescue	We'll destroy Sector 7 and report that AVALANCHE did it. Then we'll send in the rescue operation, care of Shinra, Inc…. Heh, heh, heh…this is perfect.	７番街を破壊する。アバランチの仕業として報道する。神羅カンパニーによる救助活動。フフフ……かんぺきだ
ちか	地下	n	basement, cellar, underground place,underground, below ground,secret, under cover,underground (railway), subway, metro	Sewer	地下下水道
げすいどう	下水道	n	sewer, sewer system, sewerage, drain	Sewer	地下下水道
さいあく	最悪	adv	worst,horrible, horrid, awful, terrible,in the worst case, if worst comes to worst	Well, the worst is over…	ま、最悪の事態からはのがれられた……
じたい	事態	n	situation, (present) state of affairs, circumstances	Well, the worst is over…	ま、最悪の事態からはのがれられた……
のがれる	逃れる	v1, vi	to escape	Well, the worst is over…	ま、最悪の事態からはのがれられた……
あきらめる	諦める	v1, vt	to give up, to abandon (hope, plans), to resign oneself (to)	Don't give up, never give up hope. It's not easy to destroy the pillar, right?	あきらめない、あきらめない。柱、壊すなんてそんなに簡単じゃない、でしょ？
かんたん	簡単	adj-na, n	simple, easy, uncomplicated,brief, quick, light	Don't give up, never give up hope. It's not easy to destroy the pillar, right?	あきらめない、あきらめない。柱、壊すなんてそんなに簡単じゃない、でしょ？
すっかり		adv, adv-to	all, completely, totally, entirely, thoroughly	AERIS, I got you mixed up in this…	AERIS。すっかり巻きこんでしまって……
あかり	明かり	n	light, illumination, glow, gleam,lamp, light	If we can just get past the trains that are lit up, we should be able to get out of here.	え～と……明かりのついている車両を抜けて行けば出られそうね
やまびこ		n	skips-most-stations Tōhoku-line Shinkansen	Received "Echo Screen"!	『やまびこえんまく』を手にいれた！
その	園	n, n-suf	garden (esp. man-made), orchard, park, plantation,place, location	Received "Echo Screen"!	『やまびこえんまく』を手にいれた！
じゅうせい	銃声	n	(sound of a) gunshot, (gun) report	…gun fire?	……銃声？
たちいりきんし	立ち入り禁止	adj-no, n	No Entry, No Trespassing, No Admittance, Off Limits, Keep Out, Keep Off,off-limits, restricted, forbidden	Ah…eh…uhm. Excuse me. You cannot pass without the proper clearance.	あ、あ、あの……すいません。ここから先は、立入禁止なんですが
ぐち	愚痴	n, adj-na	idle complaint, grumble,moha (ignorance, folly)	Damn right!! Don't waste time talkin's what I always say!	おう！！むだぐちたたくんじゃねえ！
たたく	叩く	v5k, vt	to strike, to clap, to knock, to beat, to tap, to pat,to play drums,to abuse, to flame (e.g. on the Internet), to insult,to consult, to sound out,to brag, to talk big,to call, to invoke (e.g. a function)	Damn right!! Don't waste time talkin's what I always say!	おう！！むだぐちたたくんじゃねえ！
ふろう	浮浪	n, vs	vagrancy, vagabondage, wander around	You can't pass. I got the miserable job of keepin' scum like you from trying to sneak in here.	ここから先は立ち入り禁止だ。俺はここでおまえみたいな浮浪者をおっぱらうケチな仕事をしてるもんだ
おっぱらう	追っ払う	v5u, vt	to chase away, to drive away, to drive out	You can't pass. I got the miserable job of keepin' scum like you from trying to sneak in here.	ここから先は立ち入り禁止だ。俺はここでおまえみたいな浮浪者をおっぱらうケチな仕事をしてるもんだ
うせる	失せる	v1, vi	to disappear, to vanish, to fade away,to go, to leave,to die	If you understand, then scram!	わかったら、さっさとうせろ！！
となり	隣	n, adj-no	neighbor (neighbour), next to (esp. living next door to)	Listen… My partner's pretty mean, I wouldn't get him mad, if I were you.	あ、あの……となりの先輩、こわいからさからわない方がいいと思いますよ
さからう	逆らう	v5u, vi	to go against, to oppose, to disobey, to defy	Listen… My partner's pretty mean, I wouldn't get him mad, if I were you.	あ、あの……となりの先輩、こわいからさからわない方がいいと思いますよ
チケット		n	ticket	You know, I got some tickets to 'Loveless', do you want to go?	先輩！！ＬＯＶＥＬＥＳＳのチケット取れたんですけどいっしょにいきません？
とれる	取れる	v1, vi, vt	to come off, to be removed,(of pain, a fever, etc.) to disappear,to be caught, to be harvested,to be interpreted (as), to be taken as,(of balance, etc.) to be attained,to be obtainable	You know, I got some tickets to 'Loveless', do you want to go?	先輩！！ＬＯＶＥＬＥＳＳのチケット取れたんですけどいっしょにいきません？
どうにゅう	導入	n, vs	introduction, bringing in, leading in, installation	Don't you worry. SOLDIER has been added to the police force.	大丈夫ですよ。なんてったってソルジャーが警備に導入されたんですから
しゅつどう	出動	n, vs	sailing, marching, going out, dispatch	Boy, it's been a while since SOLDIER's been mobilized, hasn't it?	ソルジャーの出動かぁ、久しぶりですよね。ねえ、先輩
ひさしぶり	久しぶり	adj-na, adj-no, n	a long time (since the last time), first in a long time	Boy, it's been a while since SOLDIER's been mobilized, hasn't it?	ソルジャーの出動かぁ、久しぶりですよね。ねえ、先輩
しけん	試験	n, vs	examination, exam, test,trial, experiment, test	I ever tell you that I flunked the SOLDIER entrance exam?	僕、ソルジャーの試験落っこちちゃったんですよ。この話、しましたっけ？
おっこちる	落っこちる	v1, vi	to fall down, to drop	I ever tell you that I flunked the SOLDIER entrance exam?	僕、ソルジャーの試験落っこちちゃったんですよ。この話、しましたっけ？
しゅん	旬	adj-na, adj-no	season (e.g. fruit, fish),in vogue, popular, fresh, up to date	…sigh.	……しゅん
おろおろ		adv, adv-to, vs	in confusion, in a fluster, in bewilderment, in a dither, in a panic, all shook up, helplessly,sobbing, tearfully, trembling (voice)	Uh oh… There goes the pillar.	オロオロ…柱壊れちゃうんですか
めった	滅多	adj-na	thoughtless, reckless, careless, rash,seldom, rare,ordinary, usual, common,excessive, immoderate, extreme	If things get too hairy, we'll escape. It's not something you'll see happen too often.	ほんとにやばくなったら逃げだしますから。めったに見れるもんじゃないですし
ぎりぎり	限り限り	adj-na, adj-no, n-adv	just barely, only just, at the very limit, at the last moment	L, look… This is my job, so I have to be here until the absolute last minute.	あ、あの……これが、僕の仕事だから…ギリギリまでここにいないとならないんだ
かん	感	n	feeling, sensation, emotion, admiration, impression,interjection	Umm… I just LOVE men with a sense of duty. Let me stay here with you.	うん…責任感の強いあなた、好きよ。私、そばについてるわ
ふるえる	震える	v1, vi	to shiver, to shake, to quake, to tremble, to quaver, to quiver	Umm…you're shaking. You're so gentle…I think I'm in love.	うん…あなた、ふるえてるのね？やさしい人…好きよ
ひょう	票	n-suf, n	vote, ballot,label, ticket, tag, stub	I never thought this would ever happen to me! Great… I'm quitting tomorrow!	こんなことになるなんてな！いい気分じゃねえ！明日、じひょうだ！
むくいる	報いる	v1	to reward, to recompense, to repay,to retaliate, to get revenge	Because…of our actions…many……people died…… this probably……is our punishment…	私たち……私たちの作戦でたくさん……人、死んじゃったし…… きっと……そのむくい……ね
ヘリ		n	helicopter	Be careful! They're attacking from the helicopter.	気をつけろ！　やつら ヘリで襲ってきやがる
ととのえる	整える	v1, vt	to put in order, to arrange, to tidy up, to straighten, to adjust, to fix,to get ready, to prepare, to arrange, to supply, to assemble, to buy,to work out (e.g. business deal), to arrange (e.g. marriage), to settle	Better equip ourselves before they attack in full force!	本格的にくる敵に 装備を整えておいたほうがいいわ！さっそく来たわ！
はずす	外す	v5s, vt	to remove, to take off, to detach, to unfasten, to undo,to drop (e.g. from a team), to remove (from a position), to exclude, to expel,to leave (e.g. one's seat), to go away from, to step out, to slip away,to dodge (a question, blow, etc.), to evade, to sidestep, to avoid (e.g. peak season),to miss (a target, chance, punch, etc.)	Press the (CANCEL) button for Change Party.	【カンセルボタン】Change Partyをはずす
さぎょう	作業	n, vs	work, operation, manufacturing, fatigue duty	That's all, folks! Mission accomplished.	はい、おしまい！　作業終了
とどめ	止め	n	finishing blow, clincher	CLOUD! I don't know how to stop this. Try it!	CLOUD！ 止めかたがわからないの。やってみて！
じげん	時限	n, adj-no	(school) period,period or division of time, time limit	…It's not a normal time bomb.	……ただの時限爆弾じゃない 
とおり	通り	ctr	avenue, street, way, road,coming and going, street traffic,flow (of water, air, etc.),transmission (of sound), reach (e.g. of voice),fame, reputation, popularity,the same status or way, as (e.g. as expected, as I said),understanding, comprehension,counter for sets of things, counter for methods, ways, types	That's right. You'll have a hard time disarming that one.	そのとおり。それを操作するのは難しい
ふれる	触れる	v1, vt	to touch, to feel,to experience, to come in contact with, to perceive,to touch on (a subject), to allude to, to refer to, to mention,to be in conflict with, to violate (law, copyright, etc.), to infringe,to proclaim, to make known, to spread (e.g. a rumour)	It'll blow the second some stupid jerk touches it.	どこかのバカ者が勝手にふれると困るからな”
せってい	設定	n, vs	establishment, creation, posing (a problem), setting (movie, novel, etc.), scene,options setting, preference settings, configuration, setup	Only a Shinra Executive can set up or disarm the Emergency Plate Release System.	緊急用プレート解除システムの設定と解除は神羅役員会の決定なしではできないのだ
やくいん	役員	n	officer, official, executive, staff	Only a Shinra Executive can set up or disarm the Emergency Plate Release System.	緊急用プレート解除システムの設定と解除は神羅役員会の決定なしではできないのだ
かい	会	n, n-suf	meeting, assembly, party,association, club	Only a Shinra Executive can set up or disarm the Emergency Plate Release System.	緊急用プレート解除システムの設定と解除は神羅役員会の決定なしではできないのだ
ゲスト		n	guest	I wouldn't try that…… You just might make me injure our special guest.	そんなことされると大切なゲストがケガするじゃないか
あたえる	与える	v1, vt	to give (esp. to someone of lower status), to bestow, to grant, to confer, to present, to award,to provide, to afford, to offer, to supply,to assign,to cause,to pass (a variable to a function)	Our orders were to find and catch the last remaining Ancient.	われわれタークスにあたえられた命令は『古代種』の生き残りをつかまえろ、ということだけだ
いきのこり	生き残り	n	survival,survivor, relic	Our orders were to find and catch the last remaining Ancient.	われわれタークスにあたえられた命令は『古代種』の生き残りをつかまえろ、ということだけだ
ワイヤ		n	wire,wire rope	Yo, we can use this wire to get out!	おい、このワイヤーを使って 脱出できるぜ！
ごじゅう	五十	n	fifty	Once that Plate starts coming down it'll be too late. We gotta hurry!	上のプレートが落ちてきたら ひとたまりもないわ.いそがなくちゃ！
ちくしょう	畜生	int	beast (i.e. any animal other than man),person reborn into the animal realm,brute (i.e. a contemptible human being),damn it, damn, Christ, for Christ's sake	God damn…	クッ！ちくしょう……
たおす	倒す	v5s, vt	to throw down, to bring down, to blow down, to fell, to knock down, to set (something) down on its side, to turn (something) on its side,to kill, to defeat, to beat,to overthrow, to trip up, to ruin,to leave unpaid, to cheat	They destroyed an entire village just to get to us! They killed so many people…	オレたちを倒すために街ひとつつぶしちまうんだからな。いったい何人死んだんだ……
なにもかも	何もかも	exp, n, adv	anything and everything, just about everything	It ain't us! It's the damn Shinra! It's never been nobody but the Shinra!	なにもかも神羅のやつらがやったことじゃねえか！
けんりょく	権力	n, adj-no	(political) power, authority, influence	They're evil and destroyin' our planet just to…	自分たちの金や権力のために星の命を吸い取る悪堂ども！
すいとる	吸い取る	v5r, vt	to suck up, to absorb, to squeeze (money)	They're evil and destroyin' our planet just to…	自分たちの金や権力のために星の命を吸い取る悪堂ども！
かぎり	限り	suf	limit, limits, bounds,degree, extent, scope,as far as possible, as much as possible, to the best of one's ability, very much,unless (after neg. verb),the end, the last,as long as, only	build their power and line their own damn pockets with gold!	その神羅をつぶさない限りこの星は死んじまうんだ！
せいとう	正当	adj-na, n	just, justifiable, right, due, proper, equitable, reasonable, legitimate, legal, lawful	Now listen good! The Ancients are the rightful rulers of this Planet!	よく聞け！古代種こそがこの星の正当なる支配者！
しはい	支配	n, vs	domination, rule, control,direction, management, guidance,control (e.g. over one's emotions), determining (e.g. one's fate), governing, influence, holding sway over	Now listen good! The Ancients are the rightful rulers of this Planet!	よく聞け！古代種こそがこの星の正当なる支配者！
われ	我	pref	I, me,oneself,you,prefix indicating familiarity or contempt	In my veins courses the blood of the Ancients. I am one of the rightful heirs to this planet!	われこそ古代種の血をひきし者。この星の正統なる後継者！
ひく	引く	v5k, vi	to pull, to tug, to lead (e.g. a horse),to draw (attention, sympathy, etc.), to attract (e.g. interest),to draw back (e.g. one's hand), to draw in (one's chin, stomach, etc.), to pull in,to draw (a card, mahjong tile, etc.),to draw (a line, plan, etc.),to catch (a cold),to play (a stringed or keyboard instrument),to look up (e.g. a dictionary), to consult,to haul, to pull (vehicles),to subtract, to deduct,to recede, to ebb, to fade,to be descend from, to inherit (a characteristic),to quote, to cite, to raise (as evidence),to lay on (electricity, gas, etc.), to install (e.g. a telephone), to supply (e.g. water),to hold (e.g. a note),to apply (e.g. lipstick), to oil (e.g. a pan), to wax (e.g. a floor),to move back, to draw back, to recede,to lessen, to subside, to ebb,to resign, to retire, to quit	In my veins courses the blood of the Ancients. I am one of the rightful heirs to this planet!	われこそ古代種の血をひきし者。この星の正統なる後継者！
せいとう	正統	adj-na, n, adj-no	legitimate, orthodox, traditional	In my veins courses the blood of the Ancients. I am one of the rightful heirs to this planet!	われこそ古代種の血をひきし者。この星の正統なる後継者！
こうけい	後継	n	succession,successor	In my veins courses the blood of the Ancients. I am one of the rightful heirs to this planet!	われこそ古代種の血をひきし者。この星の正統なる後継者！