きとう	気筒	n, ctr	cylinder	Well now, make yourselves at home.	まあ、てきとうにくつろいでおくれよ
くつろぐ	寛ぐ	v5g, vi	to relax, to feel at home	Well now, make yourselves at home.	まあ、てきとうにくつろいでおくれよ
のぞむ	望む	v5m, vt	to desire,to wish for, to expect,to see, to command (a view of)	That's what AERIS wanted…	AERISが望んだことだよ……
ははおや	母親	n, adj-no	mother	What did you say? But, aren't you her mother?	……なんだとさ、だって？あんた母親だろ？
せんち	戦地	n	front (in battle)	…during the war. My husband was sent to the front. Some far away place called Wutai.	……戦争中でね。わたしの夫は戦地に行ってた。ウータイという遠い国さ
たい	対	n, conj	opposite, opposition,versus, vs., v.,to (e.g. "winning a game five to three"),equal footing, equal terms,against ..., anti-, toward ..., to ...	…during the war. My husband was sent to the front. Some far away place called Wutai.	……戦争中でね。わたしの夫は戦地に行ってた。ウータイという遠い国さ
むかえる	迎える	v1, vt	to go out to meet,to receive, to welcome, to greet, to salute, to hail, to reach, to approach, to enter (a phase, era, etc.),to accept (e.g. as a member of a group or family),to call for, to summon, to invite,to approach (a certain time, a point in one's life, etc.)	One day, I went to the station because I got a letter saying he was coming home on leave.	ある日、休暇で帰ってくるっててがみをもらったからわたしは駅までむかえにいったのさ
なつく	懐く	v5k, vt	to become emotionally attached (to), to take (to)	AERIS and I became close very quickly. That child loved to talk. She used to talk to me about everything.	AERISはすぐにわたしになついてくれた。よくしゃべる子でねえ。いろいろ話してくれたよ
けんきゅうしょ	研究所	n	research establishment, research institute, laboratory	She told me how she escaped from some kind of research laboratory, and that her mother had already returned to the Planet, so she wasn't lonely…many other things.	どこかの研究所みたいなところから母親と逃げ出したこと。お母さんは星に帰っただけだからさびしくなんかない……いろいろね
よぞら	夜空	n	night sky	I didn't know what she meant. I asked if she meant a star in the sky,	わたしには意味がわからなかったよ。夜空の星かって聞いたらちがう、この星だっていわれて……
せんし	戦死	n, vs	death in battle	Several days later… we received a notice saying my husband died…	それから何日かして…夫が戦死したという知らせが…届いたんだ…
しらせ	知らせ	n	news, word, tidings, notice, notification, information,omen	Several days later… we received a notice saying my husband died…	それから何日かして…夫が戦死したという知らせが…届いたんだ…
とどく	届く	v5k, vi	to reach, to arrive, to get through, to get at,to be attentive, to pay attention,to be delivered, to carry (e.g. sound)	Several days later… we received a notice saying my husband died…	それから何日かして…夫が戦死したという知らせが…届いたんだ…
かえす	返す	suf, v5s	to return (something), to restore, to put back,to turn over, to turn upside down, to overturn,to pay back, to retaliate, to reciprocate,to repeat ..., to do ... back	We want you to return AERIS to us. We've been searching for her for a long time.	AERISを返してほしいのです。ずいぶん探しました
しじょう	至上	n	supremacy	The Ancients will lead us to a land of supreme happiness.	古代種は至上の幸福が約束された土地へ我々を導いてくれるのです
ぜひとも	是非とも	adv	by all means (with sense of not taking "no" for an answer)	That is why Shinra would like AERIS's cooperation.	ですから我々神羅カンパニーはぜひともAERISの協力を……
いっしょう	一生	adj-no	whole life, a lifetime, all through life, one existence, a generation, an age, the whole world, the era,(the only, the greatest, etc.) of one's life	She tried so hard to hide it, so I acted as though I never noticed.	一生けんめい、かくそうとしていたからわたしは気がつかないふりをしていたけどね
けんめい	賢明	adj-na, n	wise, sensible, well-advised, intelligent, sagacious, prudent	She tried so hard to hide it, so I acted as though I never noticed.	一生けんめい、かくそうとしていたからわたしは気がつかないふりをしていたけどね
きがつく	気がつく	exp, v5k	to notice, to become aware, to perceive, to realize, to realise,to be scrupulous, to be attentive,to recover consciousness, to come to oneself	She tried so hard to hide it, so I acted as though I never noticed.	一生けんめい、かくそうとしていたからわたしは気がつかないふりをしていたけどね
てあら	手荒	adj-na, n	violent, rough	The Shinra need her, so I guess they wouldn't harm her.	神羅はAERISの協力が必要だったから手荒なマネはできなかったんだろうね
ひきかえる	引き換える	v1, vt	to exchange (things), to convert	She decided to go to the Shinra in exchange for the little girl's safety.	女の子の無事と引き替えに自分が神羅に行くことになったんだ
ちちおや	父親	n	father	You're her father!? How in the world could you ever leave a child alone like that!?	あんたが父親かい！？あんた、娘をほったらかして何をやってるんだい！？
ほったらかす	放ったらかす	v5s	to neglect, to leave undone, to lay aside	You're her father!? How in the world could you ever leave a child alone like that!?	あんたが父親かい！？あんた、娘をほったらかして何をやってるんだい！？
ぐるぐる		adv, adv-to	(turning) round and round, in circles,wrapping around, winding around	See? I'm goin' in circles, now.	な？　グルグルまわっちまうんだ
ひげ	髭	n	moustache, beard, whiskers,whiskers (on a cat, etc.), feelers (on an insect, etc.), (chin) tuft,extremely short pulse appearing on an electrical signal	Daddy, don't cry. Your whiskers hurt!	とうちゃん泣いちゃダメだよ。おヒゲ、いたいよ！
エフ	Ｆ	n	F, f	AERIS's House	AERISの家２Ｆ
ほんしゃ	本社	n	head office, main office, headquarters, parent company,main shrine,this company, this shrine	We're going right into Shinra Headquarters. …You gotta be prepared for the worst.	神羅の本社にのりこむ。……カクゴが必要だぞ
おもいきり	思い切り	n	with all one's strength, with all one's heart, to the utmost,resolution, decisiveness	Right now, I feel I have to push myself to the limit.	それに今は思いきり身体を動かしたい気分なの
うごかす	動かす	v5s, vt	to move, to shift, to stir, to budge, to change position,to inspire, to rouse, to move (e.g. feeling), to influence,to change, to alter, to deny,to operate, to set in motion, to get going,to mobilize (e.g. troops), to mobilise, to deploy,to manage (e.g. funds)	Right now, I feel I have to push myself to the limit.	それに今は思いきり身体を動かしたい気分なの
かならず	必ず	adv	always, without exception, necessarily, certainly, without fail, positively, invariably	…You're right. But promise me that you'll come back to her. Don't get yourself killed.	……そうだねえ。でも、必ず迎えにくるんだよ。死んじゃいけないよ
くるむ	包む	v5m, vt	to wrap up, to tuck in, to pack, to do up, to cover with, to dress in	…You're right. But promise me that you'll come back to her. Don't get yourself killed.	……そうだねえ。でも、必ず迎えにくるんだよ。死んじゃいけないよ
かばう	庇う	v5u, vt	to protect (someone), to look after (e.g. an injured leg), to defend, to cover for, to stand up for, to stick up for	Received "Cover" Materia!	『かばう』のマテリアを手にいれた！
つながる	繋がる	v5r, vi	to be tied together, to be connected to, to be linked to,to lead to, to be related to,to be related (by blood)	Yeah. It leads to the upper world.	うん。上の世界につながってるんだよ
メートル	米	n	metre, meter,meter, gauge	There's no way we can do this. You know how far it goes up?	それは無理な話だな。何百メートルあると思ってるんだ？
へんてつ	変哲	n	unusual	Just a normal wire.	何のへんてつもないワイヤーだ
きんいろ	金色	n, adj-no	golden (colour, color)	Oh yeah? Well to me it looks like a golden shiny wire of hope.	そうかよ？　オレには金色に輝く希望の糸に見えるぜ
きぼう	希望	n, vs	hope, wish, aspiration	Oh yeah? Well to me it looks like a golden shiny wire of hope.	そうかよ？　オレには金色に輝く希望の糸に見えるぜ
いと	糸	n, n-suf	thread, yarn, string	Oh yeah? Well to me it looks like a golden shiny wire of hope.	そうかよ？　オレには金色に輝く希望の糸に見えるぜ
たとえ	仮令	adv	even if, no matter (what), if, though, although, supposing, supposing that, -ever	OK, that was a bad analogy, but, BARRET, I understand how you feel.	よくわからないたとえだったがBARRET、あんたの気持ちはわかった
はめる	嵌める	v1, vt	to insert, to put in (such that there is a snug fit), to button, to put on (something that envelops, e.g. gloves, ring),to have sex, to fuck,to pigeonhole (into a particular category),to place a ring-shaped object around something (esp. one that restricts freedom, such as handcuffs),to entrap, to set someone up (e.g. frame them for a crime, etc.)	…Maybe if I put a battery in…	……バッテリーをはめれば
プロペラ		n	propeller	The propeller might work.	あのプロペラが回りそうだな
ことば	言葉	n	language, dialect,word, words, phrase, term, expression, remark,speech, (manner of) speaking,learning to speak, language acquisition	I guess I'll just have to believe the shopkeeper.	武器屋の言葉を信じてみるか
ジャンプ		n, vs	jump	Should make it if I jump before it comes too close. (use [OK] to jump)	あれが、いちばん近づく前にジャンプすればよさそうだな。（決定ボタンでジャンプ）
かいだん	階段	n	stairs, stairway, staircase	Shinra Bldg. Stairs	神羅ビル・階段
わざわざ	態々	adv	expressly, specially, doing something especially rather than incidentally	Don't know… why…the hell… we gotta…climb…	なんで……わざわざ……こんな……くろうを……
たすけだす	助け出す	v5s	to help out of (trouble), to extricate	…because we don't want to start a commotion until we've saved AERIS.	……AERISを助け出すまで騒ぎはおこしたくないんだ
みなおす	見直す	v5s, vi	to look at again,to re-examine (policy, estimate, plan, etc.), to review,to get a better opinion of, to see in a more positive light,to improve, to recover (market, illness, etc.)	So even you will fight for someone else. Guess I figured you wrong.	あんたでも他人のために戦うことがあるんだな。見直したぜ
しか	鹿	n	deer (esp. the sika deer, Cervus nippon), cervid	That Shinra… They're just no damn good.	やっぱり、し、神羅なんてロクなやつじゃねえぜ……！
とうちゃん	父ちゃん	n	dad, daddy, papa, pa, pop	Marlene, daddy wanted to see your face one more time…	マリン、父ちゃんはもう一度お前に会いたかった……
みぎうで	右腕	n	right arm,right-hand man, right hand, right-hand person,right-handed pitcher	Yeah well, all I know is I'm only flesh 'n' blood… cept for this arm of mine.	ん、んなコト言ったってオレは、み、右腕以外は普通の体なんだぜ……
ごめん	御免	n	your pardon, sorry, no thanks,not wanting, objecting to, being fed up with, wishing to avoid,permission, leave, dismissal, discharge	…never wanna see… no more stairs the rest of my life…	か……階段なんて……もう見るのもゴメンだ……
ブロック		n, vs	to block (e.g. the way),block (lump of something (usu. square), area of town, etc.),bloc,block, physical record (e.g. on magnetic tape)	Every floor above the 60th is special and not easy to get to even for employees.	このビルの６０階から上は特別ブロックとかで社員でも簡単には入れないってな
しゃいん	社員	n	company employee,member of a corporation, company stockholder (esp. in legal contexts)	Every floor above the 60th is special and not easy to get to even for employees.	このビルの６０階から上は特別ブロックとかで社員でも簡単には入れないってな
しょうめん	正面	n, adj-no, pref	front, frontage, facade, main	Wait a second! You're not thinking of just going right through the main entrance, are you?	ちょっとまってよ！まさか正面からのりこむつもり？
ケチる		v5r	to be stingy, to scrimp	Well what else does it look like!? I'm gonna kick some Shinra butt and…	決まってるだろ！神羅のやつらをけちらして……
ぐずぐず	愚図愚図	adj-na	slowly, tardily, dawdling, lingering, hesitantly,complaining, grumbling,unsettled (e.g. weather),loose, slackened	Ain't gonna be no other way! If we keep wastin' time like this, AERIS'll…	そんなコトやってられねえ！グズグズしてたらAERISだって……
つっこむ	突っ込む	v5m, vi	to thrust (something) into (something), to cram, to stuff, to shove,to plunge into, to charge into, to rush into, to ram into, to crash into,to delve into (a matter), to go into depth, to get to the heart (of something),to press (someone) about, to point out (e.g. an inconsistency), to question sharply, to grill,to get involved with, to meddle in, to poke one's nose into,to riposte, to retort, to quip	Let's bust on in!	つっこむぞ！
しんちょう	慎重	adj-na, n	careful, cautious, prudent, discreet, deliberate	See? Let's be careful and find a different route!	でしょ？こんな時こそしんちょうに他のルートを探しましょ！
シスター		n	sister,(Catholic) nun,female partner in a homosexual relationship	No, no! The Sister Ray's not this way!	ちゃうちゃう！シスター・レイは、こっちやない！
ロビー		n	lobby, lounge	Shinra Bldg. 1f. lobby	神羅ビル・１階ロビー
うけつけ	受付	n, vs	reception (desk), information desk,receipt, acceptance	Receptionist	受付
アポイントメント		n	appointment	Excuse me! If you don't have an appointment, you'll have to…	ちょっと、困ります！アポイントメントのない方はこちらで……
わる	割る	v5r, vt	to divide,to cut, to halve, to separate, to split, to rip,to break, to crack, to smash,to dilute,to fall below,to discount,to step over (a line, etc.)	I don't need no appointment… This is a 'mergency!	わりいな、ちっとばかし急な用件でよ
ようけん	用件	n	business, thing to be done, something that should be performed, information that should be conveyed	I don't need no appointment… This is a 'mergency!	わりいな、ちっとばかし急な用件でよ
ひっこむ	引っ込む	v5m, vi	to draw back, to sink, to cave in,to be set back (e.g. from a road),to withdraw (e.g. from the public eye), to retire to (somewhere), to stay indoors, to butt out, to stay out of it	And anyone who don't wanna get their face bashed in better git outta the way!!	ケガしたくなかったらひっこんでな！！
ショップ		n	shop	Shinra Bldg. 2f. Shop	神羅ビル２階ショップ
くるま	車	n	car, automobile, vehicle,wheel	Honey…would you buy me that car!	ネエ～新しいクルマ買ってェ～
しんしゃ	新車	n	new car	But baby, it's way too expensive.	そんなこと言ったって新車は高いしなあ……
ひえ	冷え	n	chilliness, coldness	Hh, hey!	ヒ、ヒエ～！
レジ		n	(cash) register,cashier	Please take all purchases to the register	え～、お買い物はレジの向こうからどうぞ
ごうとう	強盗	n	robber, mugger,robbery, burglary	I don't want your money. AVALANCHE ain't no packa criminals.	カンチガイするな。アバランチは強盗じゃねえ
ボス		n	boss, leader, head,difficult enemy in a video game, usu. found at the end of a level or game	We jus' want back what your boss stole from us.	……アンタんとこのボスにとられたものを取り返しにきただけだ
とりかえす	取り返す	v5s, vt	to get back, to regain, to recover, to make up (for), to catch up on	We jus' want back what your boss stole from us.	……アンタんとこのボスにとられたものを取り返しにきただけだ
どうこう	動向	n	trend, tendency, movement, attitude	We ain't gonna hurt you. We might even pay ya, if ya help us.	アンタをどうこうする気はねえ。金だってちゃんと払うぜ
はらう	払う	v5u, vt	to pay (e.g. money, bill),to brush off, to wipe away, to clear away, to dust off, to cut off (e.g. branches),to drive away (e.g. one's competitors),to sell off (something unneeded), to dispose of,to pay (e.g. attention), to show (e.g. respect, concern),to make (e.g. effort, sacrifice), to expend, to exert,to move out (of one's own place), to vacate,to sweep (e.g. one's legs), to knock aside,to make a sweeping stroke (in Japanese calligraphy),to reset (an abacus)	We ain't gonna hurt you. We might even pay ya, if ya help us.	アンタをどうこうする気はねえ。金だってちゃんと払うぜ
むじん	無人	n, adj-na	unmanned, uninhabited, unattended, deserted,shorthandedness, lack of help	Welcome… to the fully automated store. Place your order…now.	……いらっしゃいませ。無人販売機が御用をうけたまわります
ごよう	御用	n	your order, your business, official business,arrest, apprehension, capture	Welcome… to the fully automated store. Place your order…now.	……いらっしゃいませ。無人販売機が御用をうけたまわります
うけたまわる	承る	v5r, vt	to hear, to be told, to know,to receive (order), to undertake, to comply, to take (a reservation, etc.)	Welcome… to the fully automated store. Place your order…now.	……いらっしゃいませ。無人販売機が御用をうけたまわります
パイル		n	pile (fabric, nuclear reactor, structural support, etc.)	Received "Pile Bunker"!	『パイルバンカー』を手にいれた！
バンカー		n	banker,bunker	Received "Pile Bunker"!	『パイルバンカー』を手にいれた！
ゆだる	茹だる	v5r, vi	to boil, to seethe,to be oppressed by heat	This is the real thing. Don't let your guard down.	ここからが本番だ。ゆだんするな
パス		n, vs	path,pass (e.g. skipping a move, passing an examination, ticket to allow entry, etc.),pass	You…again?  Uh, I'll pass.	ま、まだのってらしたんですか……え、ええ、私は今回もパスしますです
エレベーター		n	elevator, lift,elevator (aviation)	Elevator	エレベーター
とっとと		adv	quickly, at once, right away, hurriedly	Yeah, that's right! Let's go on!	おう、だよな！とっとと先を急ごうぜ！
はいじょ	排除	n, vs, adj-no	exclusion, removal, rejection, elimination, abatement, lifting (sanctions, etc.)	Destroy the intruders!	侵入者を排除しろ！
たちさる	立ち去る	v5r, vi	to leave, to depart, to take one's leave	Your kind don't belong here! Go on, get out!	おまえたちのような者が入れる場所ではない！さっさと立ち去れ！
ものかげ	物陰	n	place hidden from view, cover, shelter, hiding place	Stay in the shadows!	ものかげに隠れながら進むのよ！
かくれる	隠れる	v1, vi	to hide, to be hidden, to conceal oneself, to disappear	Stay in the shadows!	ものかげに隠れながら進むのよ！
そらす	逸らす	v5s, vt	to turn away (one's eyes, face, etc.), to avert, to divert (e.g. one's attention), to evade (e.g a question), to change (e.g. the subject),to displease, to annoy, to offend, to upset,to miss (the target, ball, etc.)	When those guards turn around, MOVE!	警備のやつらが目をそらした時がチャンスだぜ
チャンス		n	chance, opportunity	When those guards turn around, MOVE!	警備のやつらが目をそらした時がチャンスだぜ