うら	裏	n	opposite side, bottom, other side, side hidden from view, undersurface, reverse side,rear, back, behind,lining, inside,in the shadows, behind the scenes, offstage, behind one's back,more (to something than meets the eye), hidden side (e.g. of one's personality), unknown circumstances, different side,proof,opposite (of a prediction, common sense, etc.), contrary,inverse (of a hypothesis, etc.),bottom (of an inning), last half (of an inning)	Rear Tower (Pagoda)	裏の塔
かこ	過去	n, adj-no	the past, bygone days, the previous,a past (i.e. a personal history one would prefer remained secret), one's past,past (tense), preterit, preterite,previous life	CLOUD's Past	CLOUDの過去
ピース		n, vs	peace,peas,piece,peace sign, V sign	Received "Peacemaker"!	『ピースメーカー』を手にいれた！
メーカー		n	manufacturer, maker	Received "Peacemaker"!	『ピースメーカー』を手にいれた！
マスター		n	to master (a skill),proprietor, manager, owner, barkeeper,leader, chief, head,master (of arts, science, etc.),master (recording),master (device)	Received "Master Magic" Materia!	『マスターまほう』のマテリアを手にいれた！
しょうかん	償還	n, vs	repayment, redemption, amortization, amortisation	Received "Master Summon" Materia!	『マスターしょうかん』のマテリアを手にいれた！
じつよう	実用	n	practical use, utility	Thanks to the Mako energy Shinra, Inc. develops for us, everything's more convenient now.	神羅カンパニーが魔晄エネルギーを実用化してくれたおかげでわしらの生活も便利になったもんじゃ
か	化	suf	action of making something, -ification	Thanks to the Mako energy Shinra, Inc. develops for us, everything's more convenient now.	神羅カンパニーが魔晄エネルギーを実用化してくれたおかげでわしらの生活も便利になったもんじゃ
やせる	痩せる	v1, vi	to become thin, to lose weight, to reduce (one's) weight, to slim,to be barren, to be infertile, to be sterile	I hear that the natural resources near the reactors are being sucked dry.	魔晄炉のある場所の土地はどんどんやせていってしまうという話だ
あつりょく	圧力	n	pressure, stress,pressure (e.g. political), coercion, arm-twisting	What does it do? It checks the pressure of the Mako energy sent from Midgar.	何をしているのかって？ミッドガルから送られてくる魔晄エネルギーの圧力をチェックしてるのさ
ついに	遂に	adv	finally, at last,in the end	It seems there was this group called AVALANCHE runnin' around, but I guess SOLDIER finally wiped them out.	ミッドガルでは、アバランチという反神羅組織が活動していたらしいがついに神羅のソルジャーによって全滅させられたそうだな
このむ	好む	v5m, vt	to like, to prefer	It don't matter if we like it or not. Shinra's taken over, and we gotta live with it!	我々は、好むと好まざるに関わらず神羅カンパニーの支配を受け入れなければならないのさ
うけいれる	受け入れる	v1, vt	to accept, to receive, to agree	It don't matter if we like it or not. Shinra's taken over, and we gotta live with it!	我々は、好むと好まざるに関わらず神羅カンパニーの支配を受け入れなければならないのさ
おやこ	親子	n, adj-no	parent and child	Heh, heh…Just between us… I heard it was them Ava-whaddya call-ums that got President Shinra and his son.	ふふふ……ここだけの話だが神羅親子を襲ったのはアバラなんとかいう組織だって話だぜ
かんしん	関心	n	concern, interest	Don't care? If you're going to travel, you'd best keep an eye on what Shinra's doing.	関心なしか？旅をするなら神羅カンパニーの動きには注目したほうがいいぜ
うごき	動き	n	movement, move, motion,trend, development, change, fluctuation	Don't care? If you're going to travel, you'd best keep an eye on what Shinra's doing.	関心なしか？旅をするなら神羅カンパニーの動きには注目したほうがいいぜ
あんちゃん	兄ちゃん	n	(one's) older brother,young man, sonny, lad	My older brother's so stupid. He's so embarrassing I could just puke!	……お兄ちゃん、子供っぽくてわたし、はずかしい
てわたす	手渡す	v5s, vt	to hand over, to surrender	My older brother's so stupid. He's so embarrassing I could just puke!	……お兄ちゃん、子供っぽくてわたし、はずかしい
きも	肝	n	liver, innards,courage, spirit, pluck, guts,crux, essential point	Hyah, hayah, eagghh!	うりゃー、アシコシのタンレン～
れん	連	ctr	two reams (of paper), 1000 sheets of paper,stanza, verse,tribe (in taxonomy),quinella, quiniela,party, company, group, set,counter for things strung in a line, e.g. pearls, dried fish, spans of a bridge, etc.,counter for falcons	Hyah, hayah, eagghh!	うりゃー、アシコシのタンレン～
どうぶつ	動物	n	animal	But a lot of plants and animals have been disappearing at a rapid pace.	でも、そのかわりに動物や植物がどんどんへっているような気がするわ
しょくぶつ	植物	n	plant, vegetation	But a lot of plants and animals have been disappearing at a rapid pace.	でも、そのかわりに動物や植物がどんどんへっているような気がするわ
へる	経る	v1, vi	to pass, to elapse, to go by,to pass through, to go through,to experience, to go through, to undergo	But a lot of plants and animals have been disappearing at a rapid pace.	でも、そのかわりに動物や植物がどんどんへっているような気がするわ
たいほう	大砲	n	gun, cannon, artillery	Listen to me! Something really big's happening in Midgar.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！なんかミッドガルにでっかい大砲がついちゃって、すごい事になっているよ
もくひょう	目標	n	mark, objective, target	That big cannon's pointed due north… Do you think the target is Sephiroth?	あの大砲は真北に向いてるけど……目標は……セフィロス？？
おおさわぎ	大騒ぎ	n, vs	clamour, clamor, uproar, tumult, furore, furor	Everyone at Shinra's in an uproar because they heard Weapon's coming.	ウェポンがやってくるって神羅カンパニーの人間は大騒ぎしとるよ
ひ	飛	n	rook	I heard a big hydroplane carrying secret weapons, was attacked by Weapon and was sunk at sea…	秘密兵器を運んでいた飛空艇が空を飛ぶウェポンに襲われて海に沈んでしまったとか何やら……
てい	艇	n	boat	I heard a big hydroplane carrying secret weapons, was attacked by Weapon and was sunk at sea…	秘密兵器を運んでいた飛空艇が空を飛ぶウェポンに襲われて海に沈んでしまったとか何やら……
しずむ	沈む	v5m, vi	to sink, to go under, to submerge,to go down (e.g. sun), to set, to descend,to feel depressed	I heard a big hydroplane carrying secret weapons, was attacked by Weapon and was sunk at sea…	秘密兵器を運んでいた飛空艇が空を飛ぶウェポンに襲われて海に沈んでしまったとか何やら……
なにやら	何やら	adv	something, for some reason, some kind of	I heard a big hydroplane carrying secret weapons, was attacked by Weapon and was sunk at sea…	秘密兵器を運んでいた飛空艇が空を飛ぶウェポンに襲われて海に沈んでしまったとか何やら……
いぜん	以前	n-adv, n-t	ago, since, before, previous	I used to live there, too. But I heard they got lots of troubles lately.	わしも以前ミッドガルに住んでいたんじゃが近頃はあそこも色々あるようじゃな
ちかごろ	近頃	n-adv, n-t	lately, recently, nowadays	I used to live there, too. But I heard they got lots of troubles lately.	わしも以前ミッドガルに住んでいたんじゃが近頃はあそこも色々あるようじゃな
くろ	黒	n	black,black go stone,guilt, guilty person	There was a suspicious-looking man in a black cloak! He was carrying a mean-looking sword.	怪しい黒マントの男がこの町にいたんだ！ぶっそうな刀なんか持ち歩いてさ
マント		n	mantle, cloak, manteau	There was a suspicious-looking man in a black cloak! He was carrying a mean-looking sword.	怪しい黒マントの男がこの町にいたんだ！ぶっそうな刀なんか持ち歩いてさ
もちあるく	持ち歩く	v5k, vt	to carry around, to carry on one's person	There was a suspicious-looking man in a black cloak! He was carrying a mean-looking sword.	怪しい黒マントの男がこの町にいたんだ！ぶっそうな刀なんか持ち歩いてさ
つれ	連れ	n, vs	companion, company	Mr…CLOUD? Your party is waiting for you on the 2nd floor.	CLOUDさまですね。お連れさまが２階でお待ちです
ふりまわす	振り回す	v5s, vt	to wield, to brandish, to flourish, to wave (about), to swing,to display (one's knowledge), to show off,to abuse (one's power),to manipulate someone	Shinra's leading the world around by the nose, and you guys are just gonna sit back and take it?	この世界は、神羅カンパニーの動きにふりまわされているのさ。あんたたちも、それを受け入れる事だな
みなみ	南	n	south	Me? I used to work in a mine down south called Mythril Mine	オレはよぉ、この町の南にある鉱山【ミスリルマイン】で働いていたんだ
こうざん	鉱山	n	mine (ore)	Me? I used to work in a mine down south called Mythril Mine	オレはよぉ、この町の南にある鉱山【ミスリルマイン】で働いていたんだ
わんさ		adv, adv-to	in swarms, in great crowds	But, awhile back, monsters started appearing.	しかしよぉ、その鉱山にモンスターがわんさか出るようになっちまってな
おこし	お越し	n	coming, going	Seems like you're a little short. Why don't you drop by again… when you have money.	お金が足りないようですね。またのおこしを、お待ちしています
たったいま	たった今	adv	just now, a moment ago, this very minute	Listen to me! Just now, some guy in a black cloak walked east towards that grassy field.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！たった今、黒マントの男が東の草原に向かって歩いていったんだ
ひがし	東	n	east	Listen to me! Just now, some guy in a black cloak walked east towards that grassy field.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！たった今、黒マントの男が東の草原に向かって歩いていったんだ
そうげん	草原	n	grass-covered plain, grasslands, meadows, savannah, prairie, steppe	Listen to me! Just now, some guy in a black cloak walked east towards that grassy field.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！たった今、黒マントの男が東の草原に向かって歩いていったんだ
いったん	一旦	n	once,for a short time, briefly, temporarily,one morning	Listen to me! Just now, some guy in a black cloak walked east towards that grassy field.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！たった今、黒マントの男が東の草原に向かって歩いていったんだ
ゆみ	弓	n	bow (and arrow),archery,bow (for a violin, etc.)	I want you to stop that talk about Meteor falling on us!	メテオが落ちてくるだって！？やめてほしいぜ、そーゆーことはよ
いっする	逸する	vs-s	to lose (a chance), to miss (a chance),to overlook, to omit, to forget,to deviate	Listen, I work hard…and now you're tellin' me Meteor's gonna smash everything to bits?	今までいっしょうけんめい働いてきたのによぉ メテオでみんな、パーになっちまうってか！？ 
まじめ	真面目	adj-na, n	serious, honest, sober, grave, earnest, steady	Well, I ain't standin' around listenin' to fool talk like this. Makes a person lose the will to work, that's what it does!	ケッ、ばからしくて、やってられっかよ。まじめに働く気なんか失せちまったぜ
おおわらわ	大童	adj-na, n	strenuous efforts, hard fighting	And all of Midgar's gonna be destroyed by a falling meteor? Oh, don't make me laugh!	ミッドガルじゃ、メテオを破壊しようとおおわらわらしいぜ
ざん	残	n, pref	remaining, left-over, excess	I heard the remaining members of AVALANCHE smashed the Shinra troops at Midgar.	ミッドガルじゃ、アバランチの残堂が神羅カンパニーを叩きつぶしたらしいぜ
はねのける	跳ね除ける	v1, vt	to push aside, to brush or thrust aside, to remove, to get rid of	They say the remaining members of AVALANCHE broke Shinra's resistance and destroyed the Mako cannon at Midgar.	ミッドガルでは、アバランチの残堂が神羅カンパニーの抵抗をはねのけて魔晄キャノンを破壊したという話だ
キャノン		n	cannon	They say the remaining members of AVALANCHE broke Shinra's resistance and destroyed the Mako cannon at Midgar.	ミッドガルでは、アバランチの残堂が神羅カンパニーの抵抗をはねのけて魔晄キャノンを破壊したという話だ
しせつ	施設	n	institution, establishment, facility,home (for elderly, orphans, etc.)	I heard Shinra's taking it's biggest artillery from Junon and other facilities and gathering it in Midgar to fight Meteor and Weapon.	神羅カンパニーは、メテオやウェポンに対抗するため、各地の施設から役にたちそうなものを、ジュノンやミッドガルに集めているという話だ
つぶれる	潰れる	v1, vi	to be crushed, to be smashed, to be broken, to collapse,to become useless, to cease functioning, to be wasted (e.g. time),to go bankrupt, to go out of business, to fail	Dear, can you believe it? They say that Shinra's gone under!!	あなた、信じられる！？あの神羅カンパニーがつぶれちゃったんですって！！
よけい	余計	adv	too many, too much, excessive, superfluous, superabundant, extra, spare, surplus,unnecessary, needless, uncalled-for, otiose,abundantly, excessively, needlessly, all the more	This world is coming to an end all because some terrorists called AVALANCHE stuck their noses in the wrong place!	アバランチなんていうテロリストが余計なことしてくれたおかげでもう、この世はおしまいよ
このよ	この世	n, adj-no	this world, the present life (in contrast to the land of the dead)	This world is coming to an end all because some terrorists called AVALANCHE stuck their noses in the wrong place!	アバランチなんていうテロリストが余計なことしてくれたおかげでもう、この世はおしまいよ
コントローラー		n	controller	Then let me explain how to use the world map.	それじゃ、ワールドマップでのコントローラ操作について説明してあげるとしよう
してん	視点	n	opinion, point of view, visual point	Changing camera angles	視点の切替について
きりかえ	切り替え	n	exchange, conversion, replacement, switching (to), switchover	Changing camera angles	視点の切替について
さゆう	左右	n, vs	left and right,influence, control, domination	Then rotate the camera either way by pressing [PAGEUP] or [PAGEDOWN].	そして【Ｌ１ボタン】や【Ｒ１ボタン】を押してやれば、視点を左右に回してやることができるんだ
ためす	試す	v5s, vt	to attempt, to test, to try out	Try different angles until you find the one you like best. It makes the journey a lot more fun!	いろいろ試してみて自分にあった視点をさがしてやれば旅は、もっと楽しくなると思うよ
つかいわける	使い分ける	v1, vt	to use properly, to use (different things) for different purposes	There is a large and small map. Learn when to use which and you won't get lost.	地図には、大きいものと小さいものがあるから場合によって使い分けてやれば道に迷うことも少なくなると思うよ
きりかえる	切り替える	v1, vt	to change, to exchange, to convert, to renew, to throw a switch, to replace, to switch over	Push [START] twice to change the size of the map, and once more to turn it off.	【スタートボタン】を何回か押してやれば地図を切り替えたり、消すことができるんだ。便利だろ？
けす	消す	v5s, vt	to erase, to delete, to cross out,to turn off power,to extinguish, to put out,to bump off	Push [START] twice to change the size of the map, and once more to turn it off.	【スタートボタン】を何回か押してやれば地図を切り替えたり、消すことができるんだ。便利だろ？
のりもの	乗り物	n	vehicle, conveyance, transport,ride (playground, fair, carnival), playground facility	Ride things by pressing [ASSIST] and get off by pressing [CANCEL]. This isn't so hard, either!	【決定ボタン】を押せば、乗り物に乗り【キャンセルボタン】を押せば乗りものから下りる。このへんは、そんなに難しくないね
のり	乗り	n	riding, ride,spread (of paints),-seater (e.g. two-seater),(getting into the) mood, (entering into the) spirit, energy, enthusiasm, rhythm, feeling	Ride things by pressing [ASSIST] and get off by pressing [CANCEL]. This isn't so hard, either!	【決定ボタン】を押せば、乗り物に乗り【キャンセルボタン】を押せば乗りものから下りる。このへんは、そんなに難しくないね
ダッシュ		n, vs	dash	Oh, right. You can't dash on the World Map, so make sure not to press [CANCEL] unless you want to get off.	あ、そうそう。ワールドマップではダッシュができないから【キャンセルボタン】は、乗り物から下りるときにしか押さない方がいいね
こまめ	小まめ	adj-na	taking care, working well,frequent	Once on the World Map you can access the menu to save your game anywhere. It's a good idea to save frequently!	ワールドマップではメニューを開けばどこでもセーブできるからセーブはこまめにとったほうがいいよ
そうかい	総会	n	general meeting	Is that so? Well, that's that. Have a nice trip.	そうかい？　それは残念。それじゃ、よい旅を
いいかげん	いい加減	adv	irresponsible, perfunctory, careless,lukewarm, half-baked, halfhearted, vague,reasonable, moderate,considerably, quite, rather, pretty	Damn!!	……いいかげんに、しろっ！！
てんじる	転じる	v1, vi	to turn, to shift, to alter, to distract	…don't mess with me!!	……なめてんじゃねぇっ！！
ゆうじん	友人	n	friend	Huh? You're looking for your friend? You want to know where the Lifestream is?	え？　友人をさがしてる？ライフストリームはどこかって？
ストリーム		n	stream	Huh? You're looking for your friend? You want to know where the Lifestream is?	え？　友人をさがしてる？ライフストリームはどこかって？
おぼえ	覚え	n	memory, sense, experience	When I traveled to the Southern islands, a doctor was very kind to me. I seem to recall him telling me something about the Lifestream…	【南の島】に旅行に言った時ある医者に世話になったんだけどその時に医者からそんな言葉を聞いたような覚えがあるけど……
ぐん	軍	n, n-suf	army, force, troops	Hey, listen to me! The Shinra troops are on the move.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！神羅軍の動きが活発になってきたんだ
かっぱつ	活発	adj-na, n	lively, active, vigorous, animated, brisk	Hey, listen to me! The Shinra troops are on the move.	あっ、聞いてくれよ！神羅軍の動きが活発になってきたんだ
うちたてる	打ち立てる	v1, vt	to establish, to formulate	The TV news said Rufus came up with two plans. One, is to launch a rocket into space containing Huge Materia…	テレビによると、ルーファスは２つの作戦を打ち立てたらしいね。なんでもその１つはヒュージマテリアを集めて、ロケットで宇宙に飛ばすとか……
とばす	飛ばす	aux-v, v5s	to let fly, to make fly, to send flying, to blow off (e.g. in the wind), to launch, to fire, to hurl, to shoot,to skip over, to leave out, to omit, to drop (e.g. a stitch),to run fast, to drive fast, to gallop,to spray, to splash, to spatter,to say without reservation, to call out (e.g. a jeer), to rattle of (e.g. a joke),to spread (e.g. a rumour), to circulate, to send out (a message), to issue (e.g. an appeal),to transfer (to a less important post), to send away (e.g. to a provincial branch), to demote,to dispatch quickly (e.g. a reporter),to get rid of, to burn off (alcohol),to attack (e.g. with a leg manoeuvre),to do vigorously, to do roughly, to do energetically	The TV news said Rufus came up with two plans. One, is to launch a rocket into space containing Huge Materia…	テレビによると、ルーファスは２つの作戦を打ち立てたらしいね。なんでもその１つはヒュージマテリアを集めて、ロケットで宇宙に飛ばすとか……
クレーター		n	crater	Sephiroth put up a huge barrier around the North Crater.	北のクレーターにセフィロスは巨大なバリアをはったんだ
はる	張る	v5r, vt	to stick, to paste, to affix,to stretch, to spread, to strain, to tighten, to put up (tent),to form (e.g. ice on a pond),to fill, to swell,to stick out, to put, to slap,to be expensive,to keep a watch on, to be on the lookout,to become one tile away from completion,to span, to generate	Sephiroth put up a huge barrier around the North Crater.	北のクレーターにセフィロスは巨大なバリアをはったんだ
ぶちこわす	ぶち壊す	v5s, vt	to destroy, to crush, to break by striking, to wreck,to spoil, to ruin	Rufus wants to use a mammoth cannon to smash the barrier.	ルーファスは、あの大砲でそれをぶち壊す計画なんだ
ちょくせつ	直接	adj-na, n-adv, adj-no	direct, immediate, personal, firsthand	He plans to have Shinra troops rush in and attack Sephiroth after the barrier falls.	バリアがなくなったスキに神羅軍でセフィロスを直接攻撃するつもりなのさ
こうき	好機	n	good opportunity, chance	So now's the time to defeat Sephiroth.	じゃあ今こそが、セフィロスを倒す好機なわけだ
うおうさおう	右往左往	n, vs, adj-no	moving about in confusion, going every which way, going this way and that	But with Rufus dead, the Shinra troops don't know what to do. Heidegger and Scarlet don't have what it takes to lead the troops.	でも、ルーファスが死んでしまったから神羅軍は右往左往するばかり。ハイデッカーやスカーレットじゃ神羅をまとめるには力不足だし……
ちからぶそく	力不足	n, adj-no, adj-na	lack of ability, inadequacy, (being) out of one's depth	But with Rufus dead, the Shinra troops don't know what to do. Heidegger and Scarlet don't have what it takes to lead the troops.	でも、ルーファスが死んでしまったから神羅軍は右往左往するばかり。ハイデッカーやスカーレットじゃ神羅をまとめるには力不足だし……
おとうさん	お父さん	n	father, dad, papa, pa, pop, daddy, dada,husband	My old man was a miner, but he couldn't go to work after monsters started appearing in the Mythril Mines.	ボクのお父さん、炭鉱夫なんだけどミスリルの鉱山にモンスターがでてきて仕事ができなくなっちゃったんだ
すみ	炭	n	charcoal,charred remains	My old man was a miner, but he couldn't go to work after monsters started appearing in the Mythril Mines.	ボクのお父さん、炭鉱夫なんだけどミスリルの鉱山にモンスターがでてきて仕事ができなくなっちゃったんだ
こうふ	坑夫	n	miner	My old man was a miner, but he couldn't go to work after monsters started appearing in the Mythril Mines.	ボクのお父さん、炭鉱夫なんだけどミスリルの鉱山にモンスターがでてきて仕事ができなくなっちゃったんだ
げんじつ	現実	n	reality, actuality, hard fact	It's sad. Even though he's an adult, he just doesn't want to see the world as it really is. I dunno what to do.	いい大人のクセに、現実見えていないってのは、情けないよね。まいっちゃうなぁ、もう
にし	西	n	west	South of this town past the Mythril Mine and far to the west is a Shinra harbor called Junon.	この町の南にある【ミスリルマイン】を抜けてさらに西へ行くと【ジュノン】という神羅カンパニーの港があるの
みなと	港	n	harbour, harbor, port	South of this town past the Mythril Mine and far to the west is a Shinra harbor called Junon.	この町の南にある【ミスリルマイン】を抜けてさらに西へ行くと【ジュノン】という神羅カンパニーの港があるの
たてもの	建物	n	building	They say there's a reactor and many tall buildings there. I hope to see it someday.	そこにも魔晄炉があって大きな建物がたくさん建っているそうよ。ああ、行ってみたいわぁ
たつ	建つ	v5t, vi	to be erected, to be built	They say there's a reactor and many tall buildings there. I hope to see it someday.	そこにも魔晄炉があって大きな建物がたくさん建っているそうよ。ああ、行ってみたいわぁ
わへい	和平	n, vs	peace	The world's at peace… all's well.	すべて、世は事もなし……、っと。和平じゃのう
ごはん	ご飯	n	cooked rice,meal	I got my health, and enough to eat… all's well.	今日も元気だ、ごはんがうまい……、っと。和平じゃのう
さまがわり	様変わり	n, vs	changing completely, transformation	The world's changed a lot in the past few days…	この数日で、この世界は大きく様変わりしてしまった……
てんくう	天空	n	sky, air, ether, firmament, the heavens	That huge Meteor is covering up the sky and acting like it owned it.	天空をおおうメテオ……我が物顔でかっぽする巨大なモンスター……
わがものがお	我が物顔	adj-na, n	looking or acting as if one owned the place	That huge Meteor is covering up the sky and acting like it owned it.	天空をおおうメテオ……我が物顔でかっぽする巨大なモンスター……
かっぽ	闊歩	n, vs	striding, swaggering, strutting,lording it over others, acting as though one owns the place, throwing one's weight around	That huge Meteor is covering up the sky and acting like it owned it.	天空をおおうメテオ……我が物顔でかっぽする巨大なモンスター……
いふく	衣服	n	clothes	I'm goin' on a journey to pray for their souls.	ワシは、死んでしまった友人たちのめいふくをいのる旅に出ようと思う
いのる	祈る	v5r, vt	to pray, to wish	I'm goin' on a journey to pray for their souls.	ワシは、死んでしまった友人たちのめいふくをいのる旅に出ようと思う
ぼつ	没	pref	death,rejection (of a manuscript, etc.),lacking, without	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
ふね	船	n-suf, ctr	ship, boat, watercraft, vessel, steamship,tank, tub, vat, trough,counter for boat-shaped containers (e.g. of sashimi)	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
めい	姪	n	niece	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
さかい	境	n	border, boundary,turning point, watershed,area, region, spot, space, environment,psychological state, mental state,cognitive object, something perceptible by the sense organs or mind	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
ガイドブック		n	guidebook	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
すな	砂	n	sand, grit,gold dust, silver dust	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
はく	博	n-suf	doctor, PhD,exposition, fair, exhibition	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
デザート		n	dessert,desert	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
ローズ		n	rose	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
おだやか	穏やか	adj-na, n	calm, gentle, quiet	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
アース		n	earth, (electrical) ground	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
ハープ		n	harp,harmonica	A map that was sunk along with the ship. ..."Guidebook" A rose that blooms once every 1000 years in the desert. ..."Desert Rose" A harp that soothes those who hear it. ..."Earth Harp"	沈ぼつ船とともに沈んだというめい界の地図。……【ガイドブック】千年に一度、砂ばくにさくという花。……【デザートローズ】きく者の心をおだやかにするたてごと。……【アースハープ】
すいちゅう	水中	n, adj-no	underwater	OH! It's "Guidebook"! Wanna trade it for this Underwater Materia?	おお、それは【ガイドブック】！ワシの持っている【水中呼吸マテリア】と交換せぬか？
こきゅう	呼吸	n	breathing, respiration,knack, trick, secret (of doing something),harmony, balance, synchronization, accord,short interval, short pause	OH! It's "Guidebook"! Wanna trade it for this Underwater Materia?	おお、それは【ガイドブック】！ワシの持っている【水中呼吸マテリア】と交換せぬか？
ペット		n	pet,trumpet	OH! It's "Desert Rose"! Wanna trade it for that Chocobo over there?	おお、それは【デザートローズ】！ワシのペットの【チョコボ】と交換せぬか？
せいりつ	成立	n, vs	formation, establishment, materialization, coming into existence,conclusion (e.g. of a deal), approval, completion, arrangement,being valid (of a theory, argument, etc.), holding, applying	Ok then, it's a done deal!	よし、交換成立じゃな
せんすい	潜水	n, vs	diving, submerging, going underwater	it's Underwater Materia. Go on, it's yours!	【潜水マテリア】じゃ。持っていってくれ
とむらう	弔う	v5u, vt	to mourn for, to condole with (family, etc.),to hold a memorial service (for)	I guess it's time to go on a journey for the souls of my departed friends…	では、ワシはとむらいの旅に行くとするか……
チョコ		n	chocolate	Looks like my Stable's full. I'll come back when I have room.	『チョコぼう』がいっぱいだな。空きをつくってから連れていくことにしよう