あこがれる	憧れる	v1, vi	to long for, to yearn after, to admire, to be attracted by	…I used to want to be like Sephiroth, so I joined SOLDIER.	……俺はセフィロスにあこがれてソルジャーになったんだ
しんゆう	親友	n	close friend, bosom (old, intimate) friend, buddy, crony, chum	You call that a friend?	親友ってやつか？
せんゆう	戦友	n	comrade in arms, war buddy, fellow soldier	So I guess you'd call us war buddies… We trusted each other. Until one day…	戦友……かな。俺たちは信頼しあっていた。あのときまでは……
しゅうけつ	終結	n, vs, adj-no	end, close	After the war it was SOLDIER's duty to put down any resistance against the Shinra.	戦争終結後のソルジャーの任務は神羅に反抗する人たちを……。ゆううつな仕事が多かったな
にんむ	任務	n	duty, function, office, mission, task	After the war it was SOLDIER's duty to put down any resistance against the Shinra.	戦争終結後のソルジャーの任務は神羅に反抗する人たちを……。ゆううつな仕事が多かったな
はんこう	反抗	n, vs	opposition, resistance, insubordination, defiance, hostility, rebellion	After the war it was SOLDIER's duty to put down any resistance against the Shinra.	戦争終結後のソルジャーの任務は神羅に反抗する人たちを……。ゆううつな仕事が多かったな
ゆううつ	憂鬱	n, adj-na	depression, melancholy, dejection, gloom, despondency	After the war it was SOLDIER's duty to put down any resistance against the Shinra.	戦争終結後のソルジャーの任務は神羅に反抗する人たちを……。ゆううつな仕事が多かったな
さい	歳	suf, ctr	-years-old	I was 16…	俺は１６歳だった……
あめ	雨	n	rain	It sure is raining hard.	すごい雨だな
よい	酔い	n	drunkenness, intoxication,motion sickness, travel sickness	I wouldn't know…	俺は乗り物酔いなんてなったことないからな
おちつける	落ち着ける	v1, vt	to quiet, to calm down, to compose oneself, to settle down	Settle down.	もうすこしおちつけ-
しきゅう	支給	n, vs	provision, supply, payment, allowance, grant	They gave me some new Materia.	新しいマテリア、支給されたんだ
しょうかく	昇格	n, vs, adj-no	raising of status, promotion, advance	But by the time I made First Class, the war was already over.	それなのにクラス１ＳＴに昇格したのと同時に戦争が終わってしまった
ろうきゅう	老朽	n, vs	decrepitude, senescence, superannuation	Our mission is to investigate an old Mako reactor.	今回の任務は老朽化した魔晄炉の調査だ
どうさ	動作	n, vs	action, movements, motions, bearing, behaviour, behavior, execution, actuation, operation, manners	There have been reports of it malfunctioning, and producing brutal creatures.	異常動作を起こしているうえに凶暴な動物が発生している
はっせい	発生	n, vs, adj-no	outbreak, spring forth, occurrence, incidence,generation (e.g. of power or heat), genesis, origin,ontogeny, development of complex multicellular structures from cell(s) in a simple state	There have been reports of it malfunctioning, and producing brutal creatures.	異常動作を起こしているうえに凶暴な動物が発生している
うまれこきょう	生まれ故郷	n	one's birthplace	That's where I'm from.	ニブルヘイムは俺の生まれ故郷なんだ
おでまし	お出まし	n	presence, appearance, attendance, visit, going out	That would be our Monster…	モンスターのお出ましか
せけん	世間	n	world, society, people, the public	Sephiroth's strength is incredible. He is far stronger in reality than any stories you may have heard about him.	セフィロスの強さは普通じゃない。世間で知られているどんな話よりも……すごかった
みとれる	見とれる	v1, vi	to be fascinated (by), to be captivated by, to be enchanted by, to gaze admiringly at, to watch in fascination	Me? I was mesmerized by the way Sephiroth fought.	俺か？　俺はセフィロスの戦いぶりにみとれていたな
りょうしん	両親	n	parents, both parents	Ummm…how 'bout your parents?	ええと……両親は？
さいかい	再会	n, vs	another meeting, meeting again, reunion	The childhood friends are reunited!	幼なじみの再会ね！
おどろかす	驚かす	v5s, vt	to surprise, to frighten, to create a stir	…I was really surprised with TIFA.	……TIFAにはおどろかされたな
しかる	叱る	v5r, vt	to scold, to chide, to rebuke, to reprimand	Psst… (You keep wandering around here and you'll get in trouble.)	ヒソヒソ……（ウロチョロしてるとしかられるぞ）
ポーズ		n	pose,pause	Practice? Oh, you mean practice my pose.	練習……ああ、ポーズの練習か
いしき	意識	n, vs	consciousness,becoming aware (of), awareness, sense,mano-vijnana (mental consciousness, cognizer of sensory information)	Do members of SOLDIER always have to worry about what others think?	ソルジャーは常に他人の目を意識しなくちゃならないってか？
ひっそり		adv-to, adv, vs	quiet (place), still, silent, deserted,inconspicuously, modestly, quietly	…The town was quiet.	……村はひっそりしていた
おそれる	恐れる	v1, vt	to fear, to be afraid of	Everyone must be in their houses, afraid to come out because of the monsters.	みんな、モンスターを恐れて家に閉じこもっていたのかな？
とじこもる	閉じこもる	v5r, vi	to seclude oneself, to shut oneself away	Everyone must be in their houses, afraid to come out because of the monsters.	みんな、モンスターを恐れて家に閉じこもっていたのかな？
みょうちょう	明朝	n-adv, n-t	tomorrow morning	We leave for the reactor at dawn. Make sure you get to sleep early.	魔晄炉への出発は明朝。今日は早めに眠っておけ
はやめ	早め	adj-no	early,fast	We leave for the reactor at dawn. Make sure you get to sleep early.	魔晄炉への出発は明朝。今日は早めに眠っておけ
わくわく		adv, adv-to, vs	trembling, getting nervous, excited, thrilled	I'm excited.	俺はワクワクしてる
のがす	逃す	aux-v	to miss (e.g. a chance), to lose, to let get away,to set free, to let go,to fail to ...	…That's right. Don't blow your chance to become a hero…	……そうだったな。英雄になるチャンス、のがすなよ
さてい	査定	n, vs	assessment (of value, damages, etc.), revision (of a budget)	Hey, if you don't calm down, you won't get a good evaluation…	おい、落ちつきがないと査定が悪くなるぞ
わかぞう	若造	n	youngster, neophyte, greenhorn	Geez… Big-headed young kid.	ふん……若造がえらそうに
やまあるき	山歩き	n, vs	mountain-walking, hiking	If I knew this was going to happen, I would've made mountain climbing off limits…	こんなことなら山歩きなんて禁止しておけばよかった……
はら	腹	suf, ctr	abdomen, belly, stomach,womb,one's mind, one's real intentions, one's true motive,courage, nerve, willpower,generosity, magnanimity,feelings, emotions,wide middle part, bulging part,inside, interior, inner part,anti-node,counter for hard roe,counter for containers with bulging middles (pots, vases, etc.)	I hate myself for asking you this, but…	おまえにこんなことをたのむのは腹が立つが……
カメラ		n	camera	I heard Sephiroth was coming so I brought my camera.	英雄セフィロスが来るってんでカメラの用意して待ってたんですよ
ツーショット		n	photograph of two people, usu. male and female	I want a shot of Sephiroth and a monster.	セフィロスとモンスターのツーショットが欲しいんです
しゃしん	写真	n	photograph, photo, picture, snapshot, snap,movie	Take my picture.	俺の写真をとれ
マイナー		n	minor, small, unimportant, obscure,minor league,minor (key, scale, mode, etc.),miner	I don't take pictures of nobodys.	……マイナーな人の写真はとらない主義なんですよう
ガイド		n, vs	guide, tour guide, conductor, guiding, leading	Once the guide gets here, we're heading out.	ガイドが来たら出発だ
きがい	危害	n	injury, harm, danger	There's nothing that'll harm the town, right?	村に危害をくわえるようなことはないだろうな？
くわえる	加える	v1, vt	to add, to add up, to sum up, to append, to annex,to increase, to gather (e.g. speed), to pick up,to include, to count in, to let join,to inflict (damage), to deal, to give	There's nothing that'll harm the town, right?	村に危害をくわえるようなことはないだろうな？
ふり	不利	n, adj-na	disadvantage, handicap, unfavorable position	The Shinra showed up to eliminate any information that could be embarrassing to the company.	会社に不利な情報を消すために神羅がやってきたこと……
やおや	八百屋	n	greengrocer	…Oh my. You sure do have faith.	……おやおや。ずいぶん信頼してるんだな
さしいれる	差し入れる	v1, vt	to insert, to put in	Here, I've brought you something!	ほら、さしいれだよ！
やど	宿	n	lodging, inn, hotel,house, home, dwelling,home of a servant's parents (or guarantor, etc.)	Nibelheim Inn	ニブルヘイムの宿
まして	況して	exp, adv	still more, to say nothing of, not to mention,still less	The, uh… The whole inn's booked up by Shinra for the night.	あ……本日は神羅会社の皆さんの貸し切りになってましてねぇ
ぶか	部下	n	subordinate person	Say, you've really moved up in the world, being under Sephiroth's command.	セフィロスさんの部下なんて大出世だねえ、ほんとにぃ
いむ	忌む	v5m, vi	to avoid, to refrain from, to shun,to detest	This is really, somethin'.	いんや～
ひねくれる	捻くれる	v1, vi	to be contrary, to be uncooperative, to be rebellious	You used to be such a scrawny kid, and now look at you!	あのひねくれボウズがねぇ……
とめる	泊める	v1, vt	to give shelter to, to lodge, to put up, to accommodate	Give me a room	泊めてくれ
はなやか	華やか	adj-na, n	showy, brilliant, gorgeous, florid, gay	It was all right when they were building the reactor,	あの魔晄炉つくってるころがいちばんはなやかだったよ
おやま	お山	n	mountain	Within a few years, all the trees on the mountain withered away.	何年もしないうちにお山の木、枯れちゃったもんねぇ
き	木	n	tree, shrub, bush,wood, timber	Within a few years, all the trees on the mountain withered away.	何年もしないうちにお山の木、枯れちゃったもんねぇ
ちょこっと		adv	a little, a bit, slightly	Then, we'll be able to relax a little bit.	そうすりゃ、ちょこっとは良くなるさぁ
しゅっしん	出身	n, adj-no	person's origin (e.g. city, country, parentage, school)	You're from here, so you know.	この村の出身だもんねぇ
なんど	何度	n	how many times?, how often?	It's the same story I always tell. You still want to hear it?	なんど話してもいっしょさぁ。聞きたいかい？
たいじ	退治	n, vs	extermination (e.g. of pests, demons, bandits), elimination, eradication, destruction, suppression,making someone renounce worldly desires in order to concentrate on Buddha's teachings,curing illness	Is Shinra here to get rid of the monsters?	モンスター退治にやってきた神羅の人間だな？
せかいじゅう	世界中	n, adj-no	around the world, throughout the world	I'm Zangan. I travel around the world teaching children martial arts.	私はザンガン。世界中の子供たちに武術を教える旅をしている
ぶじゅつ	武術	n	martial arts, military arts,wushu, [object Object]	I'm Zangan. I travel around the world teaching children martial arts.	私はザンガン。世界中の子供たちに武術を教える旅をしている
でし	弟子	n, adj-no	pupil, disciple, adherent, follower, apprentice, young person, teacher's student-helper	I have 128 students all over the world!	弟子は世界中に１２８人！
せんす	扇子	n	folding fan	TIFA has good sense. She'll be a powerful fighter.	TIFAはセンスが良いな。彼女は強くなるぞ
りゅう	流	n	fashion, way, style, manner,school (of thought),class, rank, rate,current (electrical, water, etc.), flow, stream	And if you see anything you can use, you might want to incorporate some of my techniques.	使えるようだったらザンガン流格闘術に取り入れるのもいいな
かくとう	格闘	n, vs	hand-to-hand fighting, grappling, scuffling	And if you see anything you can use, you might want to incorporate some of my techniques.	使えるようだったらザンガン流格闘術に取り入れるのもいいな
じゅつ	術	n, n-suf	art, technique,means, way,trick, trap, plot, stratagem,magic	And if you see anything you can use, you might want to incorporate some of my techniques.	使えるようだったらザンガン流格闘術に取り入れるのもいいな
とりいれる	取り入れる	v1, vt	to harvest, to reap,to take in, to gather in,to adopt (e.g. idea), to accept (e.g. advice), to introduce, to borrow (e.g. word)	And if you see anything you can use, you might want to incorporate some of my techniques.	使えるようだったらザンガン流格闘術に取り入れるのもいいな
はれすがた	晴れ姿	n	appearing in one's finest clothes, appearing in one's hour of triumph	Come, come… Let me take a look at you!	どれどれ……晴れ姿、母さんにもよ～く見せておくれ
ほれぼれ	惚れ惚れ	adv, adv-to, vs	fondly, admiringly, with fascination, with adoration, with enchantment	You look so handsome.	ほれぼれしちゃうねえ
せのび	背伸び	n, vs	standing on tiptoe and stretching one's back to make oneself taller, stretching oneself,overreaching oneself, overstretching oneself, trying to do something beyond one's ability, pushing to the limit	Received "Orthopedic Underwear!"	『ちょっと背のびパンツ』を手にいれた！
あて	当て	suf	aim, object, purpose, end,expectations, prospects, hopes,something that can be relied upon,snack served with alcoholic drink,pad, guard,blow, strike,addressed to,per	Did you read it? My letter?	もしかして読んだの？私あての手紙
ないよう	内容	n	contents, content, substance, matter, detail, import	You remember what it said?	内容もおぼえているとか……
はっきり		vs	clearly, plainly, distinctly,to be clear, to be definite, to be certain, to be exact, to become clear, to clear up	I remember clearly	はっきりと
つづき	続き	n, n-suf	sequel, continuation, (also suffix) continuation (in time and space), second series, succession, spell	Then, let's go on with the story about Sephiroth.	それじゃあ、セフィロスの話の続きを聞かせて？
れんらく	連絡	adj-no	to contact, to get in touch,contacting, getting in touch, communication, call, message,connection, coordination, junction,intercalary, intercalaris, internuncial	Yesterday, all of Nibelheim got together to welcome me. The only person that we couldn't get a hold of was CLOUD.	きのうはニブルヘイム出身の仲間たちが集まってくれたんだ。あ、CLOUDだけは連絡先がわからなくて呼べなかったけど
つまる	詰まる	v5r, vi	to be packed (with), to be full (space, schedule, etc.),to be blocked (road, pipe, etc.), to be clogged, to be plugged up,to shorten (width, interval, etc.), to shrink (shirt, word form, etc.), to narrow,to be at a loss, to be hard pressed,to end up, to be settled,to become a geminate consonant,to hit the ball near the handle of the bat	But everyone said he wasn't really that close to us. So even if we asked, he probably wouldn't have come anyway.	でも、アイツはもともとみんなと仲が良かったわけでもないしきっと呼んでもつまらないからまあ、いいんじゃないかってみんなと話してた
とても	迚も	adv	very, awfully, exceedingly,(not) at all, by no means, simply (cannot)	Even the rooms of people in the slums are clean.	スラムの人たちでさえ部屋の中はとてもきれいなんだ
おしゃれ	お洒落	vs	smartly dressed, stylish, fashion-conscious,someone smartly dressed,to dress up, to be fashionable	Right now I'm living in the slums, but I plan to move to a really nice room, like the ones I've seen in magazines, once I make some money.	今はお金がないからスラムに住んでいるけどいつかは本で見たようなオシャレな部屋に住んでやるつもりだ
じっか	実家	n	(one's parents') home	I wonder if it's too late to go back. Sometimes I think I should've taken over my parents' store.	もうあともどりはできないかな。実家のよろず屋を継げば良かったなと思う
つぐ	継ぐ	v5g, vt	to succeed (a person, to a position, etc.), to inherit, to take over, to follow,to patch (clothes), to mend, to repair,to add (e.g. charcoal to the fire), to replenish with, to feed with, to follow up with (e.g. remarks), to gather (one's breath)	I wonder if it's too late to go back. Sometimes I think I should've taken over my parents' store.	もうあともどりはできないかな。実家のよろず屋を継げば良かったなと思う
なにより	何より	exp, adj-no, adv, n	most, best, above all	And most of all, how are you, TIFA? It feels like I haven't seen you for years.	何よりTIFA、どうしてる？もう何年も会っていないような気分だよ
アイドル		adj-f	young star, young entertainer, heartthrob, TV personality, idol,idol, image,idle	Everyone likes you. But because everyone idolizes you, I couldn't very well stab them in the back.	みんなTIFAが好きなんだ。でも、TIFAはみんなのアイドルだったから仲間を裏切ることができなかった
うらぎる	裏切る	v5r, vt	to betray, to turn traitor to, to double-cross	Everyone likes you. But because everyone idolizes you, I couldn't very well stab them in the back.	みんなTIFAが好きなんだ。でも、TIFAはみんなのアイドルだったから仲間を裏切ることができなかった
こくはく	告白	n, vs, adj-no	confession, acknowledgement, acknowledgment,profession of love,confession of sins (e.g. the confessional)	I always acted cool, but actually, I was just afraid of being jilted.	なーんてカッコつけてたけど本当は告白してフラれるのが恐かっただけなんだよ
フラ		n	hula (dance)	I always acted cool, but actually, I was just afraid of being jilted.	なーんてカッコつけてたけど本当は告白してフラれるのが恐かっただけなんだよ
ラブレター		n	love letter	Wow, if I keep writing like this, this'll become a love letter!	あ、これ以上書くとラブレターになってしまう！
へんじ	返事	n, vs	reply, answer, response	P.S.  Write me back, okay?	Ｐ・Ｓ　返事すごく欲しい
みまわり	見回り	n	patrolling	Making the rounds?	見回りですか？
そる	反る	v5r, vi	to warp, to curve, to arch, to bend,to bend backward (body or body part, e.g. fingers)	SALTZA?	そるざ？
やっつける	遣っ付ける	v1, vt	to beat, to attack (an enemy), to do away with, to finish off	Are you going to kill the monsters?	モンスターやっつけるの？
こい	故意	n	intent, intention, (on) purpose, bad faith,mens rea (guilty mind)	He's soooo cool!!	カッコイ～！！
さむざむ	寒々	adv-to, vs	wintry, very cold-looking (e.g. landscape),bleak (e.g. room, street), desolate, empty (of furnishings)	The cold mountain air of Mt. Nibel	ニブルの山の寒々とした空気
はし	橋	n	bridge	Uh…the bridge!!	は、橋が！！
どうくつ	洞窟	n, adj-no	cavern, cave, cave system, grotto	These caves are intertwined, like an ant farm…	このへんの洞窟はアリのすみたいに入り組んでいるから……
あり	蟻	n	ant	These caves are intertwined, like an ant farm…	このへんの洞窟はアリのすみたいに入り組んでいるから……
いりくむ	入り組む	v5m, vi	to be or become complicated	These caves are intertwined, like an ant farm…	このへんの洞窟はアリのすみたいに入り組んでいるから……
すがた	姿	n-suf	figure, form, shape,appearance, dress, guise,state, condition, picture, image,form (of a waka),dressed in ..., wearing ...	Oh, and Sephiroth… One person seems to be missing…	それにセフィロスさん。１人、姿が見えないけど……
いずみ	泉	n	spring, fountain	A Mako fountain. It's a miracle of nature.	魔晄の泉。自然の驚異というやつだな
きょうい	驚異	n, adj-no	wonder, miracle, amazement, prodigy	A Mako fountain. It's a miracle of nature.	魔晄の泉。自然の驚異というやつだな
ぎょうしゅく	凝縮	n, vs	condensation (of ideas, emotions, etc.),condensation (of a vapour or gas)	Materia. When you condense Mako energy, Materia is produced.	マテリアだ。魔晄エネルギーが凝縮されるとマテリアができる
てんねん	天然	n, adj-no	nature, spontaneity,natural airhead	It's very rare to see Materia in its natural state.	天然のマテリアを見るなんてめったにない機会だ
ちしき	知識	n	knowledge, information	…the knowledge and wisdom of the Ancients is held in the Materia.	……マテリアの中にはいわゆる古代種の知識が封じこまれている
じざい	自在	adj-na, n, adj-no	freely, at will	Anyone with this knowledge can freely use the powers of the land and the Planet. That knowledge interacts between ourselves and the Planet calling up magic…or so they say.	大地、星の力を自在に操る知識。その知識が星と我々をむすびつけ魔法を呼び出す……といわれている
あやつる	操る	v5r, vt	to operate (e.g. a machine), to handle, to manage, to control, to maneuver, to steer,to have a good command of (a language), to play proficiently (of a musical instrument),to work (a puppet), to pull the strings of a puppet,to manipulate (a person, public opinion, etc.), to pull the strings, to control from the shadows, to mastermind	Anyone with this knowledge can freely use the powers of the land and the Planet. That knowledge interacts between ourselves and the Planet calling up magic…or so they say.	大地、星の力を自在に操る知識。その知識が星と我々をむすびつけ魔法を呼び出す……といわれている
むすびつける	結び付ける	v1, vt	to combine, to join, to tie on, to attach with a knot, to bind (e.g. an address)	Anyone with this knowledge can freely use the powers of the land and the Planet. That knowledge interacts between ourselves and the Planet calling up magic…or so they say.	大地、星の力を自在に操る知識。その知識が星と我々をむすびつけ魔法を呼び出す……といわれている
いだい	偉大	adj-na	great, grand, magnificent, outstanding, mighty	Hojo of Shinra, Inc…. An inexperienced man assigned to take over the work of a great scientist.	神羅カンパニーの宝条。偉大な科学者の仕事を引き継いだみじゅくな男だ
ひきつぐ	引き継ぐ	v5g, vt	to take over, to hand over	Hojo of Shinra, Inc…. An inexperienced man assigned to take over the work of a great scientist.	神羅カンパニーの宝条。偉大な科学者の仕事を引き継いだみじゅくな男だ
コンプレックス		n	complex	He was a walking mass of complexes.	コンプレックスのかたまりのような男だな
とおまわり	遠回り	n	detour, roundabout way	We finally made it. We sure took the long way though.	ついたわ。ずいぶん遠回りしちゃったけどね
いっぱんじん	一般人	n	ordinary person, member of the general public, non-celebrity	Only authorized people are allowed in. This place is full of Shinra's industrial secrets.	この中は一般人立入禁止だ。神羅の企業秘密でいっぱいだからな
きぎょう	企業	n	enterprise, business, company, corporation	Only authorized people are allowed in. This place is full of Shinra's industrial secrets.	この中は一般人立入禁止だ。神羅の企業秘密でいっぱいだからな
バルブ		n	bulb,valve	CLOUD, close the valve.	CLOUD、バルブを閉じてくれ
とじる	閉じる	v1, vt, vi	to close (e.g. book, eyes, meeting, etc.), to shut	CLOUD, close the valve.	CLOUD、バルブを閉じてくれ
ことし	今年	n-adv, n-t	this year	But doing this will never put you on the same level as Professor Gast.	でもな、こんなことしたってあんたはガスト博士にはかなわないのさ
ひやす	冷やす	v5s, vt	to cool (from room temperature), to chill, to refrigerate,to calm down, to cool off, to regain one's composure, to relax,to be frightened (at), to be scared (of)	This is a system that condenses and freezes the Mako energy… that is, when it's working correctly.	これは魔晄エネルギーを凝縮してさらに冷やすシステムだ………本来はな
ほんらい	本来	adj-no, n-adv	originally, primarily,essentially, intrinsically, naturally, by nature, in (and of) itself,proper, rightful, legal, normal	This is a system that condenses and freezes the Mako energy… that is, when it's working correctly.	これは魔晄エネルギーを凝縮してさらに冷やすシステムだ………本来はな
くらべもの	比べ物	n	something worthy of comparison, something being compared	But, what are they? They've been exposed to a far higher degree of Mako than you.	しかし、こいつらはなんだ？おまえたちとは比べものにならないほど高密度の魔晄に浸されている
こうみつど	高密度	n	high density	But, what are they? They've been exposed to a far higher degree of Mako than you.	しかし、こいつらはなんだ？おまえたちとは比べものにならないほど高密度の魔晄に浸されている
ひたす	浸す	v5s, vt	to soak, to dip, to steep, to immerse,to moisten, to wet	But, what are they? They've been exposed to a far higher degree of Mako than you.	しかし、こいつらはなんだ？おまえたちとは比べものにならないほど高密度の魔晄に浸されている
うみだす	生み出す	v5s, vt	to create, to bring forth, to produce,to invent, to think up and bring into being,to give birth to, to bear	Exactly. And it's Hojo of Shinra that produced these monsters.	そうだ。モンスターを生み出したのは神羅カンパニーの宝条だ
つくりだす	作り出す	v5s, vt	to manufacture, to produce, to raise (crops),to invent, to dream up, to create	Mutated living organisms produced by Mako energy. That's what these monsters really are.	魔晄エネルギーが創り出す異形の生物。それがモンスターの正体
いぎょう	異形	adj-no, adj-na, n	fantastic, grotesque, strange-looking, suspicious-looking	Mutated living organisms produced by Mako energy. That's what these monsters really are.	魔晄エネルギーが創り出す異形の生物。それがモンスターの正体
しょうたい	正体	n	true character, true form, true colors (colours), identity, truth (of a mystery, phenomenon, etc.), origin,consciousness, one's senses	Mutated living organisms produced by Mako energy. That's what these monsters really are.	魔晄エネルギーが創り出す異形の生物。それがモンスターの正体
まさしく	正しく	adv	surely, no doubt, evidently	You saw it! All of them…were humans…	お前も見ただろう！こいつらの中にいるのは……まさしく人間だ……
ここいら	此処いら	n	around here, in this vicinity, this area	Yeah, maybe so. Wanna take a breather here?	た、確かにそうかもな。ここいらで一息いれることにするか
ひといき	一息	n, adj-no	one breath, pause, rest,one go (i.e. in a short time),small amount of effort	Yeah, maybe so. Wanna take a breather here?	た、確かにそうかもな。ここいらで一息いれることにするか
ねんらい	年来	n-adv, n-t	for some years	That would seem to explain the increase in the number of monsters recently.	ここ数年来のモンスターの増加にはそういった理由があったのか
ぞうか	増加	n, vs	increase, rise, growth, addition, increment	That would seem to explain the increase in the number of monsters recently.	ここ数年来のモンスターの増加にはそういった理由があったのか
りゆう	理由	n	reason, pretext, motive	That would seem to explain the increase in the number of monsters recently.	ここ数年来のモンスターの増加にはそういった理由があったのか
こもる	籠もる	v5r, vi	to shut oneself in (e.g. one's room), to be confined in, to seclude oneself, to hide away, to stay inside (one's shell),to be filled with (emotion, enthusiasm, etc.),to fill the room (of a gas, smell, etc.), to be heavy with (e.g. smoke), to be stuffy, to be dense,to be muffled (e.g. voice),to hold (a castle, fortress, etc.),to confine oneself in a temple to pray	We returned to Nibelheim. Sephiroth confined himself to the inn. He didn't even try to talk to me.	俺たちはニブルヘイムへもどった。セフィロスは宿屋にこもり誰とも言葉をかわそうとしない
うまれる	生まれる	v1, vi	to be born	The villagers used to call it the Shinra mansion.	村の人たちは神羅屋敷と呼んでいたわ。私たちが生まれたころにはもう空き家になっていて……
あきや	空き家	n	vacant house, unoccupied house	The villagers used to call it the Shinra mansion.	村の人たちは神羅屋敷と呼んでいたわ。私たちが生まれたころにはもう空き家になっていて……
ファ		n	fa, fah, 4th note in the tonic solfa representation of the diatonic scale	Fa [OK]	○ボタン　ファ
みそ	味噌	n	miso, [object Object],innards (from crabs, shrimps, etc.) resembling miso,key (main) point, good part (of something),weakling, weak person	Do Mi So  (C)Directional button Down	方向キー下　ドミソ（Ｃ）