よせ	寄せ	n-suf	last moves (in go, shogi, or chess), endgame,gathering, collecting, coming together	Received "Chocobo Lure" Materia!	『チョコボよせ』のマテリアを手にいれた！
しっち	湿地	n	damp ground, wetland, bog, marsh	Thinking of crossing the marshes?	お客さんたち、この先の湿地帯をこえるつもりですか？
たけ	竹	n	bamboo (any grass of subfamily Bambusoideae),middle (of a three-tier ranking system)	It's a serpent-like creature over 30 feet tall!!	身のたけ１０メートルにならんとするヘビのバケモノ！！
へび	蛇	n	snake,serpent, large snake	It's a serpent-like creature over 30 feet tall!!	身のたけ１０メートルにならんとするヘビのバケモノ！！
ききつける	聞きつける	v1, vt	to hear, to catch (the sound of something),to hear about (rumour, etc.), to overhear, to learn of (something),to get used to hearing	It detects the footsteps of anyone in the marshes.	湿地帯を進むズボズボ音を聞きつけ…
おそいかかる	襲いかかる	v5r, vi	to rush on, to attack, to swoop down on	And then, BAM!! It attacks!!!	ウギャーッとおそいかかる！！！
ぼくじょう	牧場	n	farm (livestock), ranch (US), station (Aus, NZ),pasture land, meadow, grazing land	To avoid that, buy a Chocobo at me and Choco Billy's Chocobo Farm.	そうならないためにも！グリン＆グリングリン牧場のチョコボをお買い上げください
かいあげる	買い上げる	v1, vt	to buy (of a government, public agency, etc. from a private citizen), to purchase,to buy up (all of something)	To avoid that, buy a Chocobo at me and Choco Billy's Chocobo Farm.	そうならないためにも！グリン＆グリングリン牧場のチョコボをお買い上げください
かいあげ	買い上げ	n	buying, purchasing, procurement	To purchase a Chocobo, please talk to my grandson. He's in the Chocobo stables at the far right end of the farm.	チョコボのお買い上げは向かって一番右の建物チョコボ小屋におります孫にお申し付け下さい
こや	小屋	n	hut, cabin, shed, (animal) pen,small theatre (theater), temporary playhouse, circus tent, booth,one's own house	To purchase a Chocobo, please talk to my grandson. He's in the Chocobo stables at the far right end of the farm.	チョコボのお買い上げは向かって一番右の建物チョコボ小屋におります孫にお申し付け下さい
まご	孫	n	grandchild	To purchase a Chocobo, please talk to my grandson. He's in the Chocobo stables at the far right end of the farm.	チョコボのお買い上げは向かって一番右の建物チョコボ小屋におります孫にお申し付け下さい
もうしつける	申し付ける	v1, vt	to order, to instruct	To purchase a Chocobo, please talk to my grandson. He's in the Chocobo stables at the far right end of the farm.	チョコボのお買い上げは向かって一番右の建物チョコボ小屋におります孫にお申し付け下さい
まっくろ	真っ黒	adj-na, n	pitch black	Without a Chocobo, the Midgar Zolom probably got him. It was a man in a black cape.	チョコボなしで湿地帯なんてきっとミドガルズオルムにやられちまったでしょうな。真っ黒なマントの人でしたがね
たる	足る	v5r, vi	to be sufficient, to be enough,to be worth doing, to be worthy of, to deserve,to do (the job), to serve, to answer	… Ummm, you don't have enough…	…………あの～、お金が足りませんが…
しょう	商	n, n-suf	quotient,dealing, dealer, store,second degree (of the Japanese amp Chinese pentatonic scale),Shang (dynasty of China)	No, I'm not trying to persuade you for money. It's just because of the way things are in the world.	いえいえ、商売っ気をだしているんではなくてですな。こういう時だからこそ！
ぐうぜん	偶然	n	coincidence, chance, accident, fortuity,by chance, unexpectedly, accidentally,contingency (philosophy)	It just so happens that we aren't taking care of any Chocobos for anyone else, so…	今はぐうぜんにも、うちの牧場には他のお客様からおあずかりしているチョコボもいませんし
いくせい	育成	n, vs	rearing, training, nurture, cultivation, promotion	How do you raise them?	育成の話が聞きたい
そだて	育て	n	bringing up, raising	To raise a Chocobo, you'll need a Chocobo Stable'.	チョコボをお育てになるには『チョコぼう』と呼ばれる部屋みたいなものが必要となりまして
かし	貸し	n	loan, lending,favor, favour, debt, obligation,creditor, method of lending, credit side	And they rent for 10000 gil. Currently, I can rent out up to 6 Chocobo Stables'.	そちらを１つお貸しするのに１００００ギルいただいております。ただいま『チョコぼう』は６つまでお客様にお貸しできます
いちじ	一時	n	one o'clock,once, at one time, formerly, before,for a time, for a while, for the time being, for the present, for the moment, temporarily,a time, one time, once	If you rent a 'Chocobo Stable', we will keep up to 4 of the Chocobos you catch in the fenced area outside.	こちら、お借りいただきますとお客様が捕まえになられましたチョコボを一時的に外のサクの中に４匹までおあずかりいたしまして
さく	作	n	work (e.g. of art), production,harvest, cultivation, farming, crop, yield,technique	If you rent a 'Chocobo Stable', we will keep up to 4 of the Chocobos you catch in the fenced area outside.	こちら、お借りいただきますとお客様が捕まえになられましたチョコボを一時的に外のサクの中に４匹までおあずかりいたしまして
ごじつ	後日	n-adv, n-t	in the future, another day, later	At a later date, you can select the Chocobo that you would like to put in your Chocobo Stable'.	後日、お客様が『チョコぼう』に選んで、お入れになる形になります
いれ	入れ	n-suf	container, receptacle	At a later date, you can select the Chocobo that you would like to put in your Chocobo Stable'.	後日、お客様が『チョコぼう』に選んで、お入れになる形になります
ゆう	有	n, n-pref	existence,possession, having,limited company	We don't have enough room to rent out more than 6 here…	こちらも、６つ以上お貸しするよゆうがありませんので…
わずらわす	煩わす	v5s	to trouble, to bother, to annoy, to give trouble	Chocobos aren't hard to take care of.	チョコボを育てるのに、お客様の手をわずらわす事はありません
ふだん	普段	n-t	usual, normal, everyday, habitual, ordinary,usually, normally, generally, habitually, always	The day-to-day care will all be done here.	普段の世話はこちらがしっかりやりますので
えさ	餌	n	(animal) feed, fodder, pet food,bait, lure, enticement	But, please buy the food for the Chocobo, and feed them yourselves.	ただ、チョコボにあたえるエサはお客様がお買いになるかして直接おあたえください
かい	買い	n	buying, shopping,buyer,purchase	But, please buy the food for the Chocobo, and feed them yourselves.	ただ、チョコボにあたえるエサはお客様がお買いになるかして直接おあたえください
おす	雄	n, adj-no	male (animal, plant)	Also, if you're able to find a male and a female Chocobo that like each other, they'll produce an egg. But only if you feed them a 'Nut'.	それから、オスとメスのチョコボはカップルにすることが出来ましてカップルにしたチョコボに『実』をあたえますとタマゴが生まれます
めす	雌	n, adj-no	female (animal, plant)	Also, if you're able to find a male and a female Chocobo that like each other, they'll produce an egg. But only if you feed them a 'Nut'.	それから、オスとメスのチョコボはカップルにすることが出来ましてカップルにしたチョコボに『実』をあたえますとタマゴが生まれます
カップル		n	couple	Also, if you're able to find a male and a female Chocobo that like each other, they'll produce an egg. But only if you feed them a 'Nut'.	それから、オスとメスのチョコボはカップルにすることが出来ましてカップルにしたチョコボに『実』をあたえますとタマゴが生まれます
み	実	n	fruit, nut,seed,(in broth) pieces of meat, vegetable, etc.,content, substance	Also, if you're able to find a male and a female Chocobo that like each other, they'll produce an egg. But only if you feed them a 'Nut'.	それから、オスとメスのチョコボはカップルにすることが出来ましてカップルにしたチョコボに『実』をあたえますとタマゴが生まれます
たまご	卵	n	eggs, egg, spawn, roe,hen egg,(an expert) in the making,beginning, origin, infancy	Also, if you're able to find a male and a female Chocobo that like each other, they'll produce an egg. But only if you feed them a 'Nut'.	それから、オスとメスのチョコボはカップルにすることが出来ましてカップルにしたチョコボに『実』をあたえますとタマゴが生まれます
たいてい	大抵	adj-na	mostly, ordinarily, usually, generally,probably,most, almost all,ordinary,proper, appropriate, moderate	New Chocobos inherit the abilities of their parents.	タマゴから生まれた子チョコボは大抵父と母の能力を引き継いだチョコボになりますが
まれ	稀	adj-na	rare, seldom	I've heard that sometimes new breeds of Chocobo are born with special abilities. I've never actually seen it before, though.	まれに、特異な能力を持ったチョコボになることがあるようです。私もほとんど見たことがないんですがね
とくい	特異	adj-na, n	unique, peculiar, singular	I've heard that sometimes new breeds of Chocobo are born with special abilities. I've never actually seen it before, though.	まれに、特異な能力を持ったチョコボになることがあるようです。私もほとんど見たことがないんですがね
だいぶ	大分	adv	considerably, greatly, a lot	Wasn't it really expensive?	お兄ちゃんたちだいぶ、お金取られたでしょ？
とる	取る	v5r, vt	to take, to pick up, to harvest, to earn, to win, to choose,to steal,to eat, to have (a meal),to remove (one's glasses, etc.),to compete (in sumo, cards, etc.), to play	Wasn't it really expensive?	お兄ちゃんたちだいぶ、お金取られたでしょ？
おじいちゃん	お祖父ちゃん	n	grandpa, granddad	But don't be mad at my brother or Grandpa.	でも、グリングリンお兄ちゃんやグリンおじいちゃんを怒らないでね
こちょこちょ		adv, adv-to, vs	coochy-coo, hitchy-koo, kitchy-koo (tickling sound)	The white Chocobo likes it when you scratch behind its ears.	白い子チョコボはね、耳の裏をこちょこちょしてあげるとすっごくよろこぶのよ
くすぐる	擽る	v5r, vt	to tickle,to tickle (one's curiosity, vanity, etc.), to arouse, to appeal to, to flatter,to make laugh, to amuse, to entertain	But if you scratch it someplace that it doesn't like, it'll get mad, so be careful.	でも、へんなとこくすぐるときげんわるくしちゃうから気をつけないとダメよ
げん	言	n	word, remark, statement	But if you scratch it someplace that it doesn't like, it'll get mad, so be careful.	でも、へんなとこくすぐるときげんわるくしちゃうから気をつけないとダメよ
うりきれる	売り切れる	v1, vi	to be sold out	We're all out of Chocobos. I'm taking care of the ones out there for someone else.	チョコボは売り切れちゃったんだ外にいるのは、あずかり物なんでね
やせい	野生	pn	wild, growing wild, living in the wild,I	You know, if you really want a Chocobo, you should go out and catch one.	そうだ、チョコボがほしいなら野生のをつかまえるといいよ
つめ	爪	n	nail (e.g. fingernail, toenail), claw, talon, hoof,plectrum, pick,hook, clasp	You see those claw prints out there? Wild Chocobo's will appear in those areas.	外で３本のツメあとを見ただろ？あれがあるところには野生のチョコボが必ずいるよ
いきもの	生き物	n	living thing, animal	But, if you don't have 'Chocobo Lure' they won't come out. They're very cautious by nature.	ただし『チョコボよせ』が無いとチョコボが現れないんだよ。もともと用心深い生き物だしね
だし	出し	n	dashi (Japanese soup stock made from fish and kelp),pretext, excuse, pretense (pretence), dupe, front man	But, if you don't have 'Chocobo Lure' they won't come out. They're very cautious by nature.	ただし『チョコボよせ』が無いとチョコボが現れないんだよ。もともと用心深い生き物だしね
おびきだす	おびき出す	v5s, vt	to lure out of, to decoy out of,to drive to (tears, sleep, etc.), to evoke (sympathy, etc.),to abduct, to entice out of	'Chocobo Lure' is a type of Materia which attracts Chocobos.	『チョコボよせ』はチョコボをおびきだすマテリアさ
まわり	周り	n	circumference, girth,surroundings, neighbourhood, neighborhood, vicinity	That is why you must defeat the monsters first before you catch the Chocobo.	だから、まずチョコボのまわりにいるモンスターを倒す必要があるんだ
やさい	野菜	n, adj-no	vegetable	But, if you use 'Greens' they'll focus on them and won't run away.	けど、『野菜』を使うと食べるのに夢中になって逃げにくくなるのさ
むちゅう	夢中	n	absorbed in, immersed in, crazy about, obsessed with, devoted to,forgetting oneself, daze, trance, ecstasy, delirium,within a dream, while dreaming	But, if you use 'Greens' they'll focus on them and won't run away.	けど、『野菜』を使うと食べるのに夢中になって逃げにくくなるのさ
いちもくさん	一目散	n	running at full speed, going as fast as one can go	Oh, and remember, once you get off a Chocobo, it'll escape.	あっ、それと捕まえたチョコボは一度チョコボからおりたら一目散に逃げてしまうよ
しょうだん	商談	n, vs	business discussion, negotiation	Well then, shall we get down to business?	じゃあ、そろそろ商談に入ろうかな
あり	在り	vr, vi	existing (at the present moment),alright, acceptable, passable,to be (usu. of inanimate objects), to have	Thanks!	まいどあり！
カップリング		n	coupling,shipping, [object Object]	Mating Chocobos	チョコボをカップリングする
にがす	逃がす	v5s, vt	to set free, to let go, to release,to miss (e.g. a chance), to lose, to let get away, to fail to catch	Releasing Chocobos	チョコボを逃がす
おじいさん	お祖父さん	n	grandfather,male senior-citizen	If you want to raise Chocobos, go talk to Grandpa.	チョコボを育てたいならおじいさんに会ってきてよ
もちだす	持ち出す	v5s, vt	to take out, to carry out, to bring out from where it belongs,to mention something, to broach a topic, to bring up (a subject), to raise (an issue), to mention	And even if you take it outside, this Chocobo won't run away when you get off of it.	それに、ここから外にもちだした、チョコボはおりても逃げださなくなるよ
させる	為せる	v1, vt	to make (someone) do,to allow (someone) to	Chocobos will mature differently depending on which 'Greens' they eat. Certain 'Greens' will boost their stamina.	それとね、チョコボは食べる『野菜』によって、育ち方が違ったりするんだよ。ある『野菜』を食べさせてるとスタミナモリモリになったりとかね
げんかい	限界	n, adj-no	limit, bound	If a Chocobo's abilities don't increase even when you feed it, that means it's reached its limit.	エサをあげても、能力が上がらなくなったらそのチョコボの限界がきてると思っていいよ
ストック		n	stock,ski pole	The Chocobo out there is part of the stock that you caught.	外のチョコボは、お客さんが捕まえたチョコボのストックさ
よち	余地	n	place, room, margin, scope	There's still lots of room to grow.	まだまだ成長の余地はありそうだね
タンタル		n, adj-no	tantalum (Ta)	Tantal Greens =	タンタルの野菜
しる	汁	n	juice, sap,soup, broth,(dipping) sauce	Sylkis Greens =	シルキスの野菜
キス		n, vs	kiss	Sylkis Greens =	シルキスの野菜
パ		n	pas (dancing step),Pakistan,Pacific League (Japanese baseball league)	Param Nut =	パラムの実
ラム		n	lamb (meat),rum,ram,rump	Param Nut =	パラムの実
せいかく	性格	n	character, personality, disposition, nature	Their personalities improved!	性格がよくなった！
メモ		n, vs	memo, note, memorandum	Wow, that's amazing! …Let me take some notes.	へぇ、おもしろ～いメモっとこ
くり	栗	n	Japanese chestnut (Castanea crenata)	For telling me that story, I'll tell you about each Chocobo's abilities.	面白い話聞かせてくれたお礼にクリンがチョコボの能力を見抜いてあげる
そく	速	suf, ctr	gear, speed (e.g. 4-speed transmission)	From what I see, the fastest sprinter is…	クリンが見たところダッシュが１番速そうなのは…
かわ	川	suf	river, stream,River, the ... river	Other than regular Chocobo, there are Mountain Chocobo' and 'River-Chocobo'.	チョコボには普通のチョコボ以外に『山チョコボ』と『川チョコボ』がいるんだって。
なんとう	南東	n, adj-no	southeast	A 'Great Chocobo' and a 'Good Chocobo' are found… on an island southeast of the Chocobo Sage's dwelling at Corel and in the area west of Corel. The 'Carob Nut' can be found south of the Chocobo Sage's dwelling. Monsters carry them. Let's see, is Bone Village just south of there?	『すごくいいチョコボ』と『いい感じのチョコボ』はチョコボせんにんがいる所から南東の島とコレル。それとコレルの西の方でとれるんだって。それから『カラブの実』はチョコボせんにんのいる所から南にいるモンスターがよく持ってるんだってさ。あそこから南って言うとボーンビレッジあたりかしら？
びっくり	吃驚	adj-f	to be surprised, to be amazed, to be frightened, to be astonished, to get startled, to jump,surprise (e.g. surprise party)	One surprise: If you get the "Mountain Chocobo" and the "River Chocobo" to produce an egg, You'll get a Chocobo that can cross mountains and rivers. I bet that the right nut for that is the "Carob Nut."	ちょっとビックリ『山チョコボ』と『川チョコボ』にタマゴを生ませると山も川も越えられるチョコボが出来るんだって。きっと、実は『カラブの実』がいいと思うな。
こじま	小島	n	small island, islet	Zeio Nuts are found on a little island east of the Chocobo Sage. Goblins' have them. With this, you can produce an 'Ocean Chocobo'.	『ゼイオの実』はチョコボせんにんがいる所から東の小さな小島にいる『ゴブリン』がもってるんだってこれで『海チョコボ』も生ませられるね。
レース		n	race,lace,lathe	According to my research, Mountain, River, and Ocean Chocobos are hard to produce. But, if you take the right care of the Chocobo and increase their Class ranking by winning at the races, it'll increase your chances of getting one.	クリンの研究によると山、川、海チョコボはメモの条件だけだとチョット、生まれにくいみたい。けど、うまく育ててレースにだしてクラスをあげてやるととっても生まれやすくなるみたいね.