トンデモ		n-pref, n	unthinkable, unexpected, outrageous, offensive	This Sephiroth guy's pretty strong, I'd say.	とんでもねえ強さだな。セフィロスってやつは
にる	似る	v1, vi	to resemble, to look like, to take after,to be similar (in status, condition, etc.), to be close, to be alike, to be like	Hey CLOUD. If we keep going, we'll never get to Kalm.	おいおい、CLOUDさんよぉ。このまま行くと、カームの町とは似ても似つかぬ場所に着く事になるぜ
につく	似つく	v5k, vi	to closely resemble,to suit well, to match well, to go well with	Hey CLOUD. If we keep going, we'll never get to Kalm.	おいおい、CLOUDさんよぉ。このまま行くと、カームの町とは似ても似つかぬ場所に着く事になるぜ
とおりぬける	通り抜ける	v1, vi	to go through, to pass through, to get through, to cut across	…We won't get to Kalm if we go through these caverns.	……この洞窟を通り抜けてもカームの町には着かないぞ
てんか	天下	n	the whole world,the whole country,society, the public,supremacy over a nation, government of a country, the ruling power,having one's own way, doing as one pleases,peerless, incomparable, superlative, world-famous,shogun (Edo period)	Yo, wassup? Can't SOLDIER-man even lead the way?	おいおい、しっかりしてくれよ。天下のソルジャーさまが道案内ひとつできねぇのか？
より	寄り	suf	pushing back one's opponent while locked in close quarters,having a tendency towards, being close to	Kalm should be closer to Midgar.	カームの町は、もっとミッドガル寄りの位置にあるはずよ
あくい	悪意	n	ill will, spite, evil intention, malice,bad meaning,mala fides, bad faith, criminal intent to deceive,malice	To put it negatively… you could say that.	悪意に満ちた言い方をするとそうなる……
ルー		n	roux (mixture of butter and flour used to make sauces), sauce made from such a mixture,(Japanese) curry powder, curry sauce made from this powder	It's all right, Rude! I know you don't like speeches, so don't force it!	ルード先輩！しゃべるの苦手なんだからムリしないで下さい
ふそく	不足	adj-na, n, vs	insufficiency, shortage, deficiency, lack, dearth	I'm the newest member of the Turks, Elena. Thanks to what you did to Reno, we're short-handed.	私、タークスの新人のイリーナ。レノがあんたたちにやられてタークスは人手不足
つきとめる	突き止める	v1, vt	to determine (esp. a culprit or underlying cause), to pin down, to ascertain, to locate, to identify,to stab to death	Anyhow, our job is to find out where Sephiroth is headed.	ま、それはともかく私たちの任務はセフィロスの行方をつきとめること
ていじ	定時	n, adj-no	regular time, stated period	Now go. Don't forget to file your report.	行け。定時連絡を価かすなよ
おわす	負わす	v5s, vt	to impose, to visit upon, to inflict	…Reno said he wanted to see you after the injuries you gave him healed.	……レノが言ってた。きみたちに負わされたケガが治ったらあいさつしたいと
なおる	治る	v5r, vi	to be cured, to get well, to be healed,to get mended, to be repaired, to be fixed	…Reno said he wanted to see you after the injuries you gave him healed.	……レノが言ってた。きみたちに負わされたケガが治ったらあいさつしたいと
しんあい	親愛	adj-na	deep affection,dear, beloved	He wants to show his affection for you all… with a new weapon.	親愛なるきみたちに新しい武器を見せたいそうだ
しょくん	諸君	int	you (people),gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, my friends, everyone	Well then, stay out of Shinra's way.	では、諸君。できれば神羅の邪魔はしないでもらいたいものだな
かれら	彼ら	pn	they, them	No need to tell them about our orders.	我々の任務を、彼らに教えてやる必要はない
おいかける	追いかける	v1, vt	to chase, to run after, to pursue	Very well, Rude and I will go after Sephiroth, who's heading for Junon Harbor!	それでは、私とルード先輩は【ジュノンの港】へ向かったセフィロスを追いかけます！
ふもと	麓	n	foot (of a mountain or hill), bottom, base	Base of Fort Condor	コンドルフォートふもと
せんじょう	戦場	n	battlefield, battleground	We've been fighting the Shinra on this battlefield for a long time.	ここは長い長いあいだ神羅軍と闘ってきた戦場
すえる	据える	v1, vt	to place (in position), to fix, to set (e.g. table), to lay (foundation),to install, to seat (someone),to settle (upon something), to fix (e.g. one's gaze),to apply (moxa)	We've still settled in for a long war with them.	いまもじっくりとコシをすえて彼らと闘っている
よゆう	余裕	n	surplus, margin, leeway, room, space, time, allowance, flexibility, scope,composure, placidity, complacency, calm	Could you spare some time, and help us fight them?	もしあんたらの旅に余裕があるならば我々に協力してくれ
すます	済ます	v5s, vt	to finish, to get it over with, to conclude,to settle, to pay back,to get along (without something), to make do with (without)	We don't want to sound pushy, so if you're busy with something, why don't you finish that first?	でも無理にとはいわん。急ぎの用があるのならそちらをすましてからのほうがよいだろう
ぞい	沿い	suf	along	Let's see…head north along the coast, keep going a ways and you'll run into Junon.	そうか…　ジュノンの街はここを海ぞいに北へ、ずっと行ったところだ。
おか	丘	n	hill, height, knoll, rising ground,bonus points awarded to the winner at the end of a game	But be alert because it sits in the shadows of a small hill.	小高い丘の影になっているから気をつけてな
かげ	影	n	shadow, silhouette, figure, shape,reflection, image,ominous sign,light (stars, moon),trace, shadow (of one's former self)	But be alert because it sits in the shadows of a small hill.	小高い丘の影になっているから気をつけてな
いきのこる	生き残る	v5r, vi	to survive	It seems we survived.	私たちは生き残ったようだな
ていど	程度	n, n-adv, n-suf	degree, amount, grade, standard, of the order of (following a number), about, approximately	You mean to tell me that's the extent of my powers? So that's as good as it gets? At this rate I'll never beat the Shinra…let alone Sephiroth…	俺の力はこんなものだったのか？この程度なのか……これじゃ神羅にも……セフィロスにも……
もうしわけ	申し訳	n, vs	apology, excuse	But if we give up now, what's gonna happen to Fort Condor?	でもよ、このままやめちまったらコンドルフォートの連中にもうしわけねえぜ
せめる	責める	v1, vt	to condemn, to blame, to criticize, to criticise, to reproach, to accuse,to urge, to press, to pester,to torture, to torment, to persecute,to break in (a horse)	CLOUD… You won't find the answer by blaming yourself.	CLOUD……自分責めても、答え、見つからないよ
ふやす	増やす	v5s, vt	to increase, to add to, to augment	We have to fight to avoid any more casualties.	これ以上、犠牲を増やさぬため戦わなければならないのではないか？
しす	資す	v5s, vi	to contribute, to play a part in, to have a hand in,to finance	Y'know, worryin' only tires you out. Why don't you take it easy?	気にしすぎたらしんどいだけやで。もうちょい楽にしいや
まき	巻	n	roll (e.g. of cloth),winding,volume (of book)	You'd better get down before you get involved.	まきぞえにならないうちに、降りなさい
おたから	お宝	n, adj-no	treasure,picture of a treasure ship,money, cash	Is this about the jewels?	お宝の話かい？
にんじょう	人情	n	humanity, empathy, kindness, sympathy,human nature, common sense, customs and manners	Man, she sure's cold.	ほんと、人情のねえ奴だぜ
とり	鳥	n	bird,bird meat (esp. chicken meat), fowl, poultry	A huge bird.	おっきな、鳥さん
コンドル		n	condor (incl. other New World vultures of family Cathartidae),Andean condor (Vultur gryphus)	The reactor and the Condor.	魔晄炉と、コンドルだな
ぶりょく	武力	n	armed might, military power, the sword, force	Damn, that's one big bird! But why are they trying to get rid of it with weapons?	ちょっと大きな鳥だろ？なんでまた武力まで使って排除しようとするんだ？
おおげさ	大げさ	adj-na, n	grandiose, exaggerated	…That's too much.	……おおげさすぎるな
あわてる	慌てる	v1, vi	to become confused (disconcerted, disorganized, disorganised), to be flustered, to panic,to be in a hurry, to rush	And because the Condor came, the Shinra rushed troops here.	そこへコンドルがきたので神羅は、あわてて軍を送ってきた
あたためる	温める	v1, vt	to warm, to heat	The Condor is now warming its egg, which hatches only once every few years.	今、コンドルは、数年に一度しか生まないタマゴを温めている
いとなみ	営み	n	activity, action, performance, execution, occupation, business, work, sexual intercourse, sex	We would like to protect the Condor from being harmed.	わたしたちは、神羅の手からコンドルの営みを守ってやりたい
まかす	負かす	v5s, vt	to defeat	I'm gonna leave it up to you all.	どないするかはみなさんにまかしますわ
スポンサー		n	sponsor	As our sponsor, you can help us with a contribution or by fighting alongside of us…	スポンサーとして、ギルの援助でもいいいっしょに戦ってくれるのでもいい…
えんじょ	援助	n, vs	assistance, aid, support	As our sponsor, you can help us with a contribution or by fighting alongside of us…	スポンサーとして、ギルの援助でもいいいっしょに戦ってくれるのでもいい…
すく	好く	v5k, vt	to like, to love, to be fond of	I'll leave it up to you so please do as you see fit.	まかしますから好いたようにどうぞ
うしなう	失う	v5u, vt	to lose, to part with	It's difficult to get back what you've lost…	失ってしまったものを取りもどすのは難しい……
けつだん	決断	n, vs	decision, determination	That's the right decision.	いい決断だ
せんじゅつ	戦術	n, adj-no	tactics	Ask my son, who's standing guard at the shed, about the details of our military tactics. We're depending on you.	戦術に関するくわしいことは見張り小屋にいる、私の息子に聞いてくれ。よろしく頼んだよ
やりかた	やり方	n	manner of doing, way, method, means	You've come at a good time. Shinra's changing its strategy now.	いいところへ来てくれた。神羅がやり方を変えてくるぞ
とりだす	取り出す	v5s, vt	to take out, to produce, to pick out,to fetch, to retrieve	It seems that Shinra will destroy the reactor and then take out the Materia that's inside.	どうやら、魔晄炉を破壊して中からマテリアを取り出すつもりらしい
つごう	都合	adv	circumstances, condition, convenience,to arrange, to manage,to lend money, to raise money,in all, in total, all told	They're gigantic birds and so striking. We simply can't let them be killed by man's selfishness.	でかいし、かっこいいよな。あいつらを人間の勝手な都合で殺しちまっていいのか？
いいわけ	言い訳	n, vs	excuse,explanation	Of course not. There's no way, especially by the Shinra.	いいわけないよな。特に神羅の都合で、なんて絶対に許しちゃだめだ
いす	椅子	n	chair, stool,post, office, position	If you want to see them, get on that chair over there.	見るんだったらそっちのイスの上に乗りなよ。気のすむまで見てくれよ
めざす	目指す	v5s, vt	to aim at, to have an eye on,to go toward, to head for	The enemy has targeted our mountain reactor and will be climbing to reach it.	敵は、この山の魔晄炉を目指して登ってくる。
はいち	配置	n, vs	arrangement (of resources), deployment, stationing, posting, disposition, configuration, layout	We need to ask you to use your own money to hire these soldiers, buy the equipment, set it up and give the commands.	つまり、君たちにおねがいするのは君たちのお金で兵を雇い、ワナを買って配置し、指示してもらいたい
じゅうぶん	十分	n, vs	enough, sufficient, plenty, adequate, satisfactory,sufficiently, fully, thoroughly, well, perfectly,division into ten	We know what we're asking is selfish.  We sent our wives and children to another village, But, we're resigned to stay.	ものすごく勝手なことを言っているのはじゅうぶん承知している
しょうち	承知	n, vs	knowledge, awareness,consent, acceptance, assent, admitting, compliance, agreement, acknowledgment, acknowledgement,forgiving, pardoning, excusing	We know what we're asking is selfish.  We sent our wives and children to another village, But, we're resigned to stay.	ものすごく勝手なことを言っているのはじゅうぶん承知している
うつす	移す	v5s, vt	to change, to swap, to substitute, to transfer,to change the object of one's interest or focus,to spend or take time,to infect,to permeate something with the smell or colour of something,to move on to the next or different stage of (a plan, etc.)	Let's get back to basics. If the enemy reaches this shed, you'll have to fight them off immediately.	母親たちと子どもたちは、別の村へ移した。私たちも、かくごはできている
しんにゅう	進入	n, vs, adj-no	entry, approach, penetration	It's a one shot gamble but we're asking for your help.	話を元へもどそう。もしこの小屋に敵が進入したときには君たちが直接戦わなければならなくなる
しきん	資金	n	funds, capital	If you don't have time could you help us with a donation?	時間がないのであれば資金援助をおねがいしたい
しれい	司令	n, vs	command, control, commander	If the enemy reaches the shed, they'll attack, and you'll have no choice but to battle immediately.	敵を全滅させる、もしくは敵にはコマンダーと呼ばれる司令官がいるからそいつを倒せば、勝利だ
かん	官	n	government service, the bureaucracy	If the enemy reaches the shed, they'll attack, and you'll have no choice but to battle immediately.	敵を全滅させる、もしくは敵にはコマンダーと呼ばれる司令官がいるからそいつを倒せば、勝利だ
せっしょく	接触	n, vs, adj-no	touch, contact	If you lose, the Condor's life and ours…are over.	敵が、小屋に接触したならばここへ乗りこまれてしまうから直接戦わなくてはならなくなる
とりつく	取り付く	v5k, vi	to cling to, to hold on to, to hold fast to,to grapple,to set about doing, to begin, to commence, to undertake,to take hold of, to possess, to haunt,to obtain a clue, to get a lead	But, it's only a slight chance, and we have no idea how much the reactor can endure in an attack.	もし直接戦って負けてしまい魔晄炉に取り付かれてもある程度までならなんとかなる
あるていど	ある程度	exp, adj-no, adv	to some extent, to a certain extent	But, it's only a slight chance, and we have no idea how much the reactor can endure in an attack.	もし直接戦って負けてしまい魔晄炉に取り付かれてもある程度までならなんとかなる
うばう	奪う	v5u, vt	to snatch away, to dispossess, to steal	We can't use the Tristoner or Fire Catapult, because they are still not ready.	耐え切れなくなったときコンドルの命も、私たちの命も魔晄炉内部のマテリアも、神羅に奪われてしまう
いわ	岩	n	rock, boulder,crag, cliff,anchor	The Fire Catapult is ready now, so we can set it up.	それと、３連岩落機、爆弾投機はまだ開発中なので設置はできない
とうき	投機	n	speculation, venture, stockjobbing, gambling (on stocks)	The Fire Catapult is ready now, so we can set it up.	それと、３連岩落機、爆弾投機はまだ開発中なので設置はできない
ばつ	罰	n, n-suf	punishment, penalty	After all positions are in place, press [CANCEL]. This starts the battle.	カーソルを動かしてバツ印がでないところで○ボタンを押すと配置決定となる
ライン		n	line	You can only put soldiers above the horizontal line at the very bottom.	兵を配置できるのはいちばん下にいる兵の横ラインまでだ
ていき	定期	n	fixed period, fixed term,regular, periodic, periodical,fixed-term commutation pass,fixed-term deposit,futures contracts	And you can bet Shinra will send platoons at you on a regular basis.	それから、神羅は定期的に部隊を送ってくる
てはじめ	手始め	n	outset, start, beginning	Hey, looks like they're getting ready to attack right now! Please, any help is appreciated…	お、ちょうどいいのが登ってきたぞ。手始めには、ちょうどいい数だ。それじゃあいっちょ、おねがいしますか
せめる	攻める	v1, vt	to attack, to assault, to assail	Be sure and scout the area well… We don't know when they'll attack again.	次は、いつ攻めてくるかわからないからときどき、見てきてくれよ
はいりこむ	入り込む	v5m, vi	to go into, to come into, to penetrate, to get in, to step in (a house),to become complicated	My God! They're attacking! We're counting on you.	しまった！入りこんできたぞ！君たち、たのんだよ
しのぐ	凌ぐ	v5g, vt	to endure, to keep out (e.g. rain), to stave off (e.g. starvation),to pull through, to get over, to survive,to surpass, to outdo, to excel, to eclipse, to defy, to slight	We made it through that one somehow. But, Shinra'll be back.	なんとかしのいだな。しかし、神羅はかならずまたやってくる
しょじ	所持	n, vs	possession, owning	Hey we're a little short on money… so could you at least make it  gil?	おいおい、所持金がちょっと少なすぎないか？せめて、ギルはないとな
さきほど	先ほど	n-adv, n-t	some time ago, not long ago, just now	So we're getting a little short on funds.	ちょっと、遅かったな。つい先ほど神羅に攻めこまれてしまったよ
やつら	奴ら	pn	they, those guys	The situation has changed. Looks like the enemy is set to attack. If we lose here, it's over.	どうやら事態が変わったらしい。奴らこれで終わりにする気らしい。これに負けるとやばいぞ
たくす	託す	v5s, vs-c, vt	to entrust (someone) with, to leave (a matter) with someone, to place under someone's care,to have someone deliver (a message, parcel, etc.), to send (through someone), to leave (a message) with someone,to use (something) to express (one's feelings, opinion, etc.), to express in the form of (something),to use as a pretext	Our lives are in your hands. We're counting on you.	おれたちの明日は君たちにたくす。たのんだぞ
わい	私	pn	I, me,you	Wyverns	ワイバーンについて
バーン		adv-to	barn,road,bang, bam, wham	Wyverns	ワイバーンについて
そくど	速度	n	speed, velocity, rate	Wyverns are flying types that can move at high speed. Stoner and Tristoner aren't effective against them.	ワイバーンは、飛行タイプで移動速度が速い。したがって、岩落機や、３連岩落機はあまり、効果がない
かんせつ	間接	n, adj-no	indirection, indirectness	Barbarians are human types. They attack from a distance, so you've got to be on your toes.	バーバリアンは、人型タイプだ。間接攻撃をしてくるので、注意が必要だ
ファイター		n	fighter	Your mobile allies are: Fighters, Attackers, Defenders, Shooters, Repairers and Workers.	味方には、移動できるタイプとしてファイター、アタッカー、ディフェンダーシューター、リペアラー、ワーカー、がいる
アタッカー		n	attacker (esp. in volleyball)	Your mobile allies are: Fighters, Attackers, Defenders, Shooters, Repairers and Workers.	味方には、移動できるタイプとしてファイター、アタッカー、ディフェンダーシューター、リペアラー、ワーカー、がいる
とうせき	投石	n, vs	stone throwing	Your immobile allies are: Stoner, Tristoner, Catapult, and Fire Catapult.	移動できないタイプとして岩落機、３連岩落機、投石機爆弾投機、がある
ディフェンダー		n	defender	Defenders	ディフェンダーについて
こうしゅ	攻守	n	offense and defense, offence and defence, batting and fielding	Fighters are good at defending and attacking, but aren't especially effective or deficient for any enemy.	ファイターは、攻守にバランスがよいが得意な相手、苦手な相手もいない
バランス		n, vs	balance	Fighters are good at defending and attacking, but aren't especially effective or deficient for any enemy.	ファイターは、攻守にバランスがよいが得意な相手、苦手な相手もいない
とくい	得意	n, adj-no, adj-na	triumph, prosperity,pride,one's strong point, one's forte, one's specialty,frequent customer (client, etc.)	Fighters are good at defending and attacking, but aren't especially effective or deficient for any enemy.	ファイターは、攻守にバランスがよいが得意な相手、苦手な相手もいない
ぜんせん	前線	n, adj-no	(weather) front,front line, forward area, action zone	Attackers move extremely fast and are best for expanding the front line.	アタッカーは、移動速度が速く 前線を広げるのに向いている。 
ひろげる	広げる	v1, vt	to spread, to extend, to expand, to enlarge, to widen, to broaden,to unfold, to open, to unroll, to unwrap,to scatter about, to spread around,to make flourish, to cause to prosper	Attackers move extremely fast and are best for expanding the front line.	アタッカーは、移動速度が速く 前線を広げるのに向いている。 
きょてん	拠点	n	position, location, base, point, site	Defenders have high endurance, but move slowly. They're best suited for defense.	ディフェンダーは、体力が高いが移動速度が遅い、拠点防御に向いている。
じらい	地雷	n	land mine, [object Object],topic that sets one off (esp. based on previous experience), sensitive topic, taboo topic	Workers set mines. Mines have strong attacking power, but Workers don't.	ワーカーは、地雷を置くことができる。地雷の攻撃力は高くても自分の攻撃力は低い
なげる	投げる	v1, vt	to throw, to hurl, to fling, to toss, to cast,to give up, to abandon, to throw away,to cast (a glance, shadow, doubt, etc.)	Catapults shoot rocks a great distance, causing extensive damage to every enemy they hit.	投石機は、石を遠くへ投げることができる落下地点にいる敵にダメージを与えられる
らっか	落下	n, vs	fall, drop, descent, coming down	Catapults shoot rocks a great distance, causing extensive damage to every enemy they hit.	投石機は、石を遠くへ投げることができる落下地点にいる敵にダメージを与えられる
てっきょ	撤去	n, vs	withdrawal, revocation, repeal,demolition, removal	You must pay for every weapon you set up. Even if you decide to move it later, you can only get back half of the gil you spent.	一度設置したものを、てっきょしても設置するために使った費用があるので設置に要したギルの半分しか返ってこないぞ
ようす	要す	v5s, vs-c, vt	to need, to require, to take, to demand	You must pay for every weapon you set up. Even if you decide to move it later, you can only get back half of the gil you spent.	一度設置したものを、てっきょしても設置するために使った費用があるので設置に要したギルの半分しか返ってこないぞ
おおめ	多め	n, adj-na	somewhat larger quantity, larger portion	You have 10 enemies. There appear to be many Beasts, so you may want to deploy more Attackers.	今回の敵は、１０匹程度だ。ビーストの数が多いようなのでアタッカーを多めに配置した方がいいかもしれないな
まざる	混ざる	v5r, vi	to be mixed, to be blended with, to associate with, to mingle with, to join	The Barbarians are mixed during this attack.	今回はバーバリアンが混ざっているようだ
とりかえし	取り返し	n	recovery, undoing, recall	Up to now, you've lost  times. If you lose too many times, you won't be able to come back.	これまでに回負けてしまいましたね。あまり、負けてしまうと取り返しがつかないことになってしまいますよ
やすみやすみ	休み休み	adv	resting at times,with careful thought, after proper consideration	Come on… break time, break time!	さ、やすみやすみ