さびれる	寂れる	v1, vi	to decline (in prosperity), to become deserted, to become desolate,to taper off (of a sound)	What happened to this town? It's so run-down…	なんだ、この村は？やけにさびれているな……
おんがく	音楽	n	music	What's that music? It sure sounds lively.	この音楽は何だ？ずいぶんにぎやかじゃねえか
よじのぼる	よじ登る	v5r, vi	to climb, to clamber (over, up), to scramble (up), to scale, to claw one's way up	We gotta get to the town up there… Mebbe we could climb the tower?	なんとかして上の街に行きてぇな。柱でもよじのぼるか？
おがむ	拝む	v5m, vt	to assume the posture of praying, to press the palms and fingers of both hands together, to do reverence (e.g. before a statue of the Buddha), to pay one's respects,to beg, to make a supplication,to see (something or someone of high status)	Yeah, I'd like to take a good look at the new President of Shinra, Inc.!	神羅の新しい社長さんの顔をおがんでみたいぜ
こうあつ	高圧	n, adj-no	high voltage, high pressure	High voltage tower…	高圧電流の柱ねぇ……
でんりゅう	電流	n	electric current	High voltage tower…	高圧電流の柱ねぇ……
くうどう	空洞	adj-no	cave, hollow, cavity,hollow	Maybe…he dropped some from the North Caves into the Lifestream…	たぶん……北の大空洞からライフストリームに落ちて……
おじ	伯父	n	uncle	Sir, do you know where the Lifestream runs through?	おじぃさん、ライフストリームが通っている場所を知ってる？
わたる	渡る	v5r, vi	to cross over, to go across,to extend, to cover, to range, to span	What? Does that mean Sephiroth already crossed the ocean?	あれっ？それじゃ、セフィロスはもう、海を渡っちゃったってこと？
ついていく	ついて行く	v5k-s	to accompany, to follow, to keep up with	Aren't you going to follow her?	あの子について行かないのか？
リハーサル		n	rehearsal	I heard they're rehearsing the reception for the new Shinra president.	これは神羅の新しい社長の歓迎式のリハーサルだと思う
ばあちゃん		n	granny, grandma, gran, female senior-citizen	Grandpa and Grandma told me this beach was beautiful when they were small.	ここはね、じいちゃんばあちゃんが子供のころにはとてもきれいな海岸だったって
かいがん	海岸	n, adj-no	coast, beach	Grandpa and Grandma told me this beach was beautiful when they were small.	ここはね、じいちゃんばあちゃんが子供のころにはとてもきれいな海岸だったって
いるか	海豚	n	dolphin (or other small toothed whales, such as porpoises, belugas, etc.)	But…you might be able to if Mr. Dolphin helps you. Follow me!	でも……イルカさんの力をかりればなんとかなるかな。ちょっと来て
こうたい	交代	n, vs	alternation, change, relief, relay, shift, substitution (sports, etc.), taking turns	What? It's not time for our shift, yet. Just relax.	えっ？まだ、交代の時間じゃないはずだぜ。ゆっくり休んでおけよ
のせる	乗せる	v1, vt	to place on (something),to give (someone) a ride, to give a lift, to pick up, to help on board,to load (luggage), to carry, to take on board,to send out (on the airwaves, etc.),to deceive, to take for a ride,to (sing) along with (musical accompaniment),to let (someone) take part,to excite (someone),to publish (an article), to run (an ad)	That's not enough! Can't let you get on…	足りないじゃないか！乗せてやれないな
とんと	頓と	adv	completely,not at all	Hmm… I've never seen that feller before.	さあ……そんな人とんと見かけんねぇ
にぎやか	賑やか	adj-na	bustling, busy, lively	There's nothing here now… But it used to be a busy port.	ここはな～んにもないよ。むかしは、にぎやかな港だったけどねえ
いかん	遺憾	adj-na, n	regrettable, unsatisfactory	Sorry, CLOUD. Priscilla needs to rest for a while.	すまんな、CLOUDくん。プリシラは、すこし休ませなくちゃいかんのじゃ
へいたい	兵隊	n	soldier, sailor	I just saw some Shinra soldiers all huddled together discussing something.	さっき、向こうに神羅の兵隊が集まって何か話しておったんじゃ
ひこうき	飛行機	n	aeroplane, airplane, aircraft	They said a plane carrying Huge Materia would be taking off from the airport above.	なんでも、大きなマテリアをつんだ飛行機が上のエアポートから飛びたつんだとか
エアポート		n	airport	They said a plane carrying Huge Materia would be taking off from the airport above.	なんでも、大きなマテリアをつんだ飛行機が上のエアポートから飛びたつんだとか
とびたつ	飛び立つ	v5t, vi	to jump up, to start up, to leap to one's feet, to fly away, to take off	They said a plane carrying Huge Materia would be taking off from the airport above.	なんでも、大きなマテリアをつんだ飛行機が上のエアポートから飛びたつんだとか
かいてい	海底	adj-f	bottom of the ocean, seafloor, seabed,undersea, submarine	I remember years ago, seein' the Shinra build a long pipe underwater.	ワシャ、むかし神羅が海底に長～いパイプをつくっていたのを見たことがある！
おいぼれる	老いぼれる	v1, vi	to become decrepit, to become senile	Listen CLOUD, I'm over the hill, but Priscilla is still a child.	なぁ、CLOUDくん……ワシはもう老いぼれじゃがプリシラは、まだ子供なんじゃ
さかな	魚	n	fish	There's been no fish in the water! It got so polluted…phew…	サカナもぉ……さっぱりとれんわ！海が汚れてしもうてな……フゥ
さっぱり		adj-na	feeling refreshed, feeling relieved,neat, tidy, clean,frank, open-hearted, plain, simple, light,completely, entirely,not in the least (with neg. verb), not at all,nothing at all, completely useless, hopeless, awful	There's been no fish in the water! It got so polluted…phew…	サカナもぉ……さっぱりとれんわ！海が汚れてしもうてな……フゥ
ホイッスル		n	whistle	There's a dolphin in the bay. If you get close enough and blow the whistle, it might come to you.	入りえにイルカがおったぞ。近づいてホイッスルを吹いたらよってくるかもしれんな
ふく	吹く	v5k, vt	to blow (e.g. wind), to play a wind instrument,to whistle,to laugh, to burst into laughter,to smelt, to mint,to brag, to talk big	There's a dolphin in the bay. If you get close enough and blow the whistle, it might come to you.	入りえにイルカがおったぞ。近づいてホイッスルを吹いたらよってくるかもしれんな
でいり	出入り	n	going in and out, entering and exiting,visiting regularly, frequenting, having regular dealings with,income and expenditure, incomings and outgoings,increase and decrease, surplus and deficit, fluctuation,fight, trouble, quarrel, dispute,indentations (e.g. of a coastline)	I've noticed there's been a lot of Shinra ships recently. I think they're going to the Junon Underwater Reactor.	それと最近、神羅の船の出入りが多いと思ったらジュノン近海の【海底魔晄炉】に行っているようなんじゃ
きんかい	近海	n, adj-no	coastal waters, adjacent seas	I've noticed there's been a lot of Shinra ships recently. I think they're going to the Junon Underwater Reactor.	それと最近、神羅の船の出入りが多いと思ったらジュノン近海の【海底魔晄炉】に行っているようなんじゃ
はこびだす	運び出す	v5s, vt	to carry out (of somewhere), to transport, to take out	Isn't Shinra trying to transport the Reactor's Huge Materia?	神羅は、魔晄炉のヒュージマテリアを運び出そうとしているんじゃないかね？
ピーエッチエス	ＰＨＳ	n	personal handyphone system, PHS	Whoa, I'll hold the PHS for you. It'll break if it gets wet.	おっと、それにＰＨＳをあずかっておいたぜ。ぬれたら壊れちまうからな
ぬれる	濡れる	v1, vi	to get wet	Whoa, I'll hold the PHS for you. It'll break if it gets wet.	おっと、それにＰＨＳをあずかっておいたぜ。ぬれたら壊れちまうからな
むかんけい	無関係	adj-na, n, adj-no	unrelated	No you're wrong! We have nothing to do with the Shinra.	ちがうの！わたしたち、神羅と無関係なのよ
あいしょう	相性	n	affinity, compatibility	We don't get along with the Shinra.	……神羅とは相性が悪いな
にる	煮る	v1, vt	to boil, to simmer, to stew, to seethe	Here!! This is for you, CLOUD!	ハイ！　ホイッスルをおにいちゃんにプレゼント
つきでる	突き出る	v1, vi	to project, to stick out, to stand out	See that rod sticking out at the top? If you jump just right, you can climb to the top of the town.	柱の上のほうに、ボウが突き出ているの。位置を合わせてジャンプすればボウに乗って、上の街まで上れるはずよ
あわせる	合わせる	v1, vt	to match (rhythm, speed, etc.),to join together, to unite, to combine, to add up,to face, to be opposite (someone),to compare, to check with,to cause to meet (e.g. an unpleasant fate),to place together, to connect, to overlap,to mix, to combine,to put blade to blade, to fight	See that rod sticking out at the top? If you jump just right, you can climb to the top of the town.	柱の上のほうに、ボウが突き出ているの。位置を合わせてジャンプすればボウに乗って、上の街まで上れるはずよ
り	里	n	Japanese league, ri, [object Object],neighbourhood (under the ritsuryo system; orig. of 50 homes),unit of area (approx. 654m by 654m)	My name is… Pri-scil-la! Now you say it.	わたしの名前はねプ～リ～シ～ラ！ハイ、言ってみて
おぼれる	溺れる	v1, vi	to drown, to nearly drown, to sink below the surface (of water),to indulge in, to lose one's head over something, to wallow in	Did you drown? It gets deeper the farther you go out.	おぼれちゃったのね？遠くの方は深くなってるの
うんぱんせん	運搬船	n	freighter, cargo ship, carrier	Jump up to the cargo ship on the dolphin?	イルカに運搬船までつれていってもらいますか？
じんこう	人工	n, adj-no	artificial, man-made, human work, human skill, artificiality	Mouth to mouth!?	人工呼吸って！？
しめる	湿る	v5r, vi	to become damp, to become moist, to become wet,to lack energy, to be in a slump, to be in low spirits, to feel depressed	Nope…she's not breathing…	ダメだわい……呼吸しとらん……
いき	息	n	breath, breathing,tone, mood	Just take a deep breath, hold it in. Then breathe into her.	とにかく息を大きく吸いこんで限界までに息を止める。そして、その息を口うつしするのじゃ
すいこむ	吸い込む	v5m, vt	to inhale, to breathe in, to suck up, to imbibe,to absorb, to soak up	Just take a deep breath, hold it in. Then breathe into her.	とにかく息を大きく吸いこんで限界までに息を止める。そして、その息を口うつしするのじゃ
ストップ		n, vs	stop	Push it again to stop the gauge.	□ボタン２回目　呼吸ゲージストップ
おばあさん	お祖母さん	n	grandmother,old woman, female senior citizen	Grandma's House	おばあさんの家
ひとやすみ	一休み	n, vs	(short) rest, breather, break	Let's rest	ひと休みしよう
レディー		n	lady,ready	At least knock when you enter a lady's room!	レディの部屋に入る時はノックぐらいしてよね！
ノック		n, vs	knock, knocking,fungo hitting, hitting balls for fielding practice	At least knock when you enter a lady's room!	レディの部屋に入る時はノックぐらいしてよね！
ひかえる	控える	v1, vt	to be temperate in, to refrain, to abstain, to hold back, to restrain oneself from excessive ...,to make notes, to jot down (e.g. phone number),to be in preparation for, to be in waiting for,to be soon, to be in the offing,to be in a close relationship (e.g. as a backer, etc.)	Locker Room	ひかえ室
ロッカー		n	locker,rocker	There's a uniform in the locker. Hurry and change!	制服はロッカーに入ってる。はやく着替えろ！
へた	下手	adj-na, n	unskillful, poor, awkward,imprudent, untactful	There's Shinra soldiers all around. Better not try anything dumb…	まわりは神羅兵だらけだ。へたに逆らうような愚はおかせないが…
ぐ	愚	n, adj-na	foolishness, silliness, stupidity, folly,I, me	There's Shinra soldiers all around. Better not try anything dumb…	まわりは神羅兵だらけだ。へたに逆らうような愚はおかせないが…
そで	袖	n	sleeve,wing (of a stage, desk, gate, etc.)	I was so proud when I first put it on.	はじめてそでを通したときほこらしく思ったっけ
おむかえ	お迎え	n	receiving, welcoming, going to meet,final call, call of fate, approach of death	You remember the greeting procedure, right!?	おまえ、お迎えの仕方は覚えてるだろうな！
たいちょう	隊長	n	commanding officer	Commander!! We'll help too!	隊長！！自分らが手伝うであります！
みほん	見本	n, adj-no	sample, specimen, pattern,model, example	This is how to do it!	見本であります！
うたう	歌う	v5u, vt	to sing,to sing (one's praises in a poem, etc.), to compose a poem, to recite a poem	We'll sing too!	うたうであります！
うた	歌	n	song,classical Japanese poetry (esp. tanka),modern poetry	Then I'll sing along with you!	ではっ！自分のうたごえにあわせるであります！
こうしん	行進	n, vs	march, parade	Now, march!! This's the Welcoming March!	まずは行進！！歓迎パレードであります！
パレード		n, vs	parade	Now, march!! This's the Welcoming March!	まずは行進！！歓迎パレードであります！
しゅく	夙	n	[object Object]	Quietly--!!	せいしゅくに～！！
いっち	一致	n, vs	coincidence, agreement, union, match,conformity, consistency,cooperation	One, two! Three, four!	おいっちにっ！いっちにっ！
じだい	時代	n-t, n	period, epoch, era, age,the times, those days,oldness, ancientness, antiquity,antique, period piece	Realization---of the new era---	ニュ～エイジ～　時代をきずく～
きずく	築く	v5k, vt	to build, to construct, to erect,to amass (e.g. fortune), to pile up	Realization---of the new era---	ニュ～エイジ～　時代をきずく～
ほちょう	歩調	n	pace, step, cadence	Keep in step with the soldier next to you and march smoothly!	となりの兵士と歩調をあわせておごそかにいさましく歩くであります！
おごそか	厳か	adj-na, n	solemn (ceremony, atmosphere, etc.), austere, grave, majestic, dignified, stately, impressive	Keep in step with the soldier next to you and march smoothly!	となりの兵士と歩調をあわせておごそかにいさましく歩くであります！
かかげる	掲げる	v1, vt	to put up (a notice, sign, etc.), to hang out (e.g. a banner), to fly (e.g. a flag), to hoist, to raise, to display,to hold up high, to raise overhead,to tout (a principle, plan, etc.), to herald, to hold up (an ideal), to parade (e.g. a slogan),to publish, to print, to carry (e.g. an article),to tuck up (e.g. sleeves), to roll up,to stoke (a fire), to fan (a flame)	Once you're all in step, shoulder your gun!	みんなの歩調があったら銃をかかげるであります！
しれい	指令	n, vs	orders, instructions, directive, command	This is the military, soldier!!  Your orders for today are to send off President Rufus at the dock!	軍隊をなめちょるな！！本日！！　次の指令は港でルーファウス様のお見送りだっ！
みおくり	見送り	n	seeing one off, farewell, escort	This is the military, soldier!!  Your orders for today are to send off President Rufus at the dock!	軍隊をなめちょるな！！本日！！　次の指令は港でルーファウス様のお見送りだっ！
しどう	指導	n	guidance, leadership, instruction, direction, coaching,shido (disciplinary action for a minor infringement of the rules of judo)	I'll keep drilling you until it's time!	時間まで、みっ～ちり指導しちゃる！
ごうれい	号令	n, vs	order (esp. to a number of people), command,ritual of bowing at start and end of school class	All right!! Line up in order and show me your final pose!	よ～っし！！自分の号令にあわせてお見送りのキメポーズをするのだ！
トライアングル		n	triangle	[MENU]!	△ボタン：トライアングル！
スクウェア		n	square	[SWITCH]!	□ボタン：スクウェア！
クロス		n	cross,crossing, intersecting,cross (soccer),cloth,tablecloth,wallpaper, wall fabric	[CANCEL]!	×ボタン：クロス！
ライト		n	light,right,right field, right fielder	Right: Right Turn!	右：ライトターン！
ターン		n, vs	turn	Right: Right Turn!	右：ライトターン！
レフト		n	left	Left: Left Turn!	左：レフトターン！
スペシャル		adj-na, n	special	Commander!! What's today's special pose?	隊長！！本日のスペシャルポーズは？
かい	解	n	solution (of equation)	Attention! Dismissed!!	すわっ！解散っ！！
じっせん	実戦	n	combat, actual fighting	Someday I'll get to use my special pose in a real battle!	いつか実戦でこのスペシャルポーズを決めるであります！
おら	己	pn	I, me	Oh…no!! No one's here!	いか～ん！！誰もおら～ん
ちかみち	近道	n, vs	short way, shortcut	Captain!! We'll take a short cut!	隊長！！近道するであります！
さりげ	然り気	n, adj-nari	like that, in that manner	Just GO! Then you just nonchalantly sneak in from the back! Make sure no one sees you!	いっちゃれ！さりげな～く、【後ろ】から！ばれないようにしのびこむのだ！
しのびこむ	忍び込む	v5m, vi	to creep in, to steal in	Just GO! Then you just nonchalantly sneak in from the back! Make sure no one sees you!	いっちゃれ！さりげな～く、【後ろ】から！ばれないようにしのびこむのだ！
ティーブイ	ＴＶ	n	television, TV	Now listen up! This parade's gonna be broadcast live on Shinra TV around the world!	いいか！このパレードは全世界の神羅ＴＶに生中継されておる！
なかつぎ	中継ぎ	n	joining, joint,intermediation, acting as an intermediary,relaying, taking over,middle relief pitcher, middle reliever,pole-shaped item with a join in the middle,tea container with a lid that is the same size as the body	Now listen up! This parade's gonna be broadcast live on Shinra TV around the world!	いいか！このパレードは全世界の神羅ＴＶに生中継されておる！
さらす	晒す	v5s, vt	to expose (to the sun, public, danger, etc.),to bleach, to refine,to rinse (vegetables), to soak,to sentence someone to public humiliation	If you look bad, the whole Junon army will look bad. Remember that and don't screw up!	ぶさまなかっこうをさらせばジュノン軍隊全体のはじとな～る。そこんとこ、きもにめいじて行動せい！
はじ	恥	n	shame, embarrassment, disgrace	If you look bad, the whole Junon army will look bad. Remember that and don't screw up!	ぶさまなかっこうをさらせばジュノン軍隊全体のはじとな～る。そこんとこ、きもにめいじて行動せい！
めいじる	命じる	v1, vt	to order, to command,to appoint	If you look bad, the whole Junon army will look bad. Remember that and don't screw up!	ぶさまなかっこうをさらせばジュノン軍隊全体のはじとな～る。そこんとこ、きもにめいじて行動せい！
あいず	合図	n, vs	sign, signal, cue	OK! Jump in when I give you the sign!	んだば！！自分が合図したら列にしのびこ～め！
れつ	列	ctr	row, line, file, column, queue, rank, procession,company (of someone), group, ranks,sequence,counter for rows	OK! Jump in when I give you the sign!	んだば！！自分が合図したら列にしのびこ～め！
しのぶ	忍ぶ	v5b, vt	to conceal oneself, to hide,to endure, to bear, to stand, to put up with	OK! Jump in when I give you the sign!	んだば！！自分が合図したら列にしのびこ～め！
みいだす	見出す	v5s, vt	to find out, to discover, to notice, to detect,to select, to pick out,to look out (from the inside),to be wide-eyed (in surprise, anger, etc.)	Just sneak in from the back! Don't mess up the row! And no matter what you do, don't try to go in from the front!	さりげな～く、【後ろ】から！列をみだすな！前からいこうとしてもダ～メだぞ！
げき	劇	n	drama, play,powerful drug	Charge!!	とっつげき～！！
し	視	pref, suf	visual, vision	Live TV Ratings%	ＴＶ中継視ちょう率　　　　　％
ちょう	蝶	n	butterfly	Live TV Ratings%	ＴＶ中継視ちょう率　　　　　％
ばんぐみ	番組	n	program (e.g. TV), programme	TV Producer	ＴＶ番組プロデューサー
プロデューサー		n	producer (film, TV, etc.)	TV Producer	ＴＶ番組プロデューサー
エーディー	ＡＤ	n	AD, Anno Domini,assistant director (movie, etc.)	AD	ＡＤ
まずまず	先ず先ず	adj-no, adj-na, adv	tolerable, passable, adequate, so-so	So-so.	まずまずです
でかす	出来す	v5s, vt	to do, to commit, to accomplish, to achieve	We did it!	でかした！
こころづく	心付く	v5k, vi	to perceive, to notice	Send that soldier something special.	あの兵士あてにこころづけでもおくっとけ
しゅりゅうだん	手榴弾	n	hand grenade, grenade	Received "Grenade"!	『手榴弾』を手にいれた！
しずか	静か	adj-na	quiet, silent,slow, unhurried,calm, peaceful	Hey! Line up and shut up!	ほれ！しずかにならんどれ！
ほ	歩	ctr	step, stride,counter for steps	Don't make a move!	１歩たりとも動くなよ！
いただける	頂ける	v1, vi	to be able to receive, to be able to take, to be able to accept,to be able to eat, to be able to drink,to be acceptable, to be satisfactory	It should be ready in about three more days.	もう３日待っていただければ。ガハハハハハ！
くうぐん	空軍	n, adj-no	air force	Even the Air Force's Gelnika?	空軍のゲルニカもか？
わらい	笑い	n	laugh, laughter,smile,sneer,sex aids (e.g. dildos, pornographic books, erotic woodblock prints, etc.)	Stop that stupid horse laugh.	その笑いかたはやめろ
さいなん	災難	n	calamity, misfortune, disaster	What a disaster.	災難だったな
いらいら	苛々	vs, n, adv, adv-to	to get irritated, to get annoyed, to be on the edge, to fret, to lose patience	Heidegger was really irritated…	ハイデッカーはイライラしてるからな
はっけん	発見	n, vs	discovery, detection, finding	The man in the Black Cape's been roaming the city, but we can't find him.	黒マントの男が街をうろついてるのに発見できないんだ
そのあと	その後	exp, n-adv, n-t	after that, afterwards, thereafter	He disappeared right after that. There's a rumor going around that it was Sephiroth.	その後、行方不明さ。あの英雄セフィロスだってウワサだぜ
すみやか	速やか	adj-na	quick, speedy, prompt, rapid, swift	Attention! Dismissed!	こら～っ！すみやかに解散せ～っ！
かいさん	解散	n, vs	breaking up (e.g. meeting), dispersing (e.g. crowd),dissolving (company, organization, etc.), liquidating, disbanding,dissolving (diet, parliament, etc.)	Attention! Dismissed!	こら～っ！すみやかに解散せ～っ！
たるむ	弛む	v5m, vi	to slacken, to loosen, to relax, to droop (e.g. loose or flabby skin), to sag (ceiling),to slack off (e.g. one's work, attention), to not put one's heart in	You're too lazy!! No break for you!!	たるんどる！！おまえは休み時間な～し！！
きんむ	勤務	n, vs	service, duty, work	Nap while on duty?	勤務時間中におひるね？
ばすえ	場末	n, adj-no	outskirts (of a town), run-down district	Welcome to 'Inn'd of the line' in Junon. Wait, I shouldn't be sayin' stuff like that.	ジュノン場末の安宿へようこそ！あっ、こんなこと自分で言うことないか……
やすやど	安宿	n	cheap hotel	Welcome to 'Inn'd of the line' in Junon. Wait, I shouldn't be sayin' stuff like that.	ジュノン場末の安宿へようこそ！あっ、こんなこと自分で言うことないか……
とまり	泊まり	n	overnight stay, stopover,inn, hotel,anchorage,night duty	Wanna spend the night?	お泊まりですか？
ぐっすり		adv, adv-to	soundly (sleeping), fast (asleep)	Enjoy your stay.	ぐっすりおやすみなさい
はよう	早う	n, adv	early	Good morning! You still seem a little sleepy.	おっはようございます！まだ眠そうな顔してますね～
ホテル		n	hotel	Our rates are the same as the 1st class hotels.	値段だけは高級ホテルなみにランクアップですよ
なみ	並	n-suf	average, medium, common, ordinary,mid-grade (item), regular grade,same level as, equal to, equivalent to, on par with,each (e.g. month), every,row of (teeth, houses, etc.), line of	Our rates are the same as the 1st class hotels.	値段だけは高級ホテルなみにランクアップですよ
りく	陸	n	land, shore	Please! Come in…	ど～ぞ！おはいりくださ～い
えがお	笑顔	n, vs	smiling face, smile	No charge for a smile…	うふ♥この笑顔はサービスにしとくわ
かちのこる	勝ち残る	v5r, vi	to win and advance to the next round	If we don't do this…we can't compete.	こうでもしないと……商売に勝ち残っていけないんですよ
うりあげ	売り上げ	n	amount sold, sales, proceeds, takings, turnover	But, what bothers me is that the girls make more than me.	でも、店の売り上げよりも女の子たちのバイト代のほうが高いってのが悩みの種なんだなあ
バイト		n	work (esp. part time or casual),byte, octet,bite,cutting tool, bit	But, what bothers me is that the girls make more than me.	でも、店の売り上げよりも女の子たちのバイト代のほうが高いってのが悩みの種なんだなあ
なやみ	悩み	n	trouble, troubles, worry, distress, sorrows, anguish, agony, problem	But, what bothers me is that the girls make more than me.	でも、店の売り上げよりも女の子たちのバイト代のほうが高いってのが悩みの種なんだなあ
しゃっきん	借金	n, vs	debt, loan, liabilities, borrowing money	I keep getting more and more in debt. I've got to get out from under it somehow. Maybe I'll have Weapon help me.	ますます借金かさんじゃうなあ。なんとかふみたおしたいなあ。ウェポンだのみかなあ
かさむ	嵩む	v5m, vi	to mount up, to pile up, to accumulate, to increase	I keep getting more and more in debt. I've got to get out from under it somehow. Maybe I'll have Weapon help me.	ますます借金かさんじゃうなあ。なんとかふみたおしたいなあ。ウェポンだのみかなあ
ふみたおす	踏み倒す	v5s, vt	to trample down, to crush underfoot, to kick down,to avoid paying (e.g. a debt), to jump (a bill), to bilk, to shirk	I keep getting more and more in debt. I've got to get out from under it somehow. Maybe I'll have Weapon help me.	ますます借金かさんじゃうなあ。なんとかふみたおしたいなあ。ウェポンだのみかなあ
しょうどう	衝動	n, vs	impulse, impetus, urge	Look, why not forget about Meteor and Weapon for now and do a little impulse shopping!?	メテオもウェポンもわすれてこんなときこそ衝動買いなのよ！
まじる	混じる	v5r, vi	to be mixed, to be blended with, to associate with, to mingle with, to interest, to join	Why don't you surround yourself with young girls and have some fun…maybe for the last time.	ピチピチの若い子にまじって最後にひとはなさかせたいもんじゃ
じょうしつ	上質	adj-na, n, adj-no	fine quality	Hey! Yo! Our weapons are the best!	ヘイ！　ヨ！うちの武器は上質だぜ！
しいれ	仕入れ	n	stocking, buying up	Oh! Welcome! We don't have much of anything now. I forgot to order enough the last time but feel free to look around!	おう！　いらっしゃい！仕入れに失敗しちゃってろくなもん売ってないんだけど見てってくんな！
しなぞろえ	品揃え	n	assortment, product lineup	Weapon was really something. No one can compare with his strength. But with a selection like this, our weapons could beat him.	ウェポンすごかったな～。強さじゃ、かなわないけど品ぞろえじゃ、うちの武器の勝ちだぜ
アクセサリー		n	accessory	Item Store	アクセサリー屋
いんたい	引退	n, vs	retirement	I used to be in SOLDIER… Afterwards, I opened this shop…	わし、元ソルジャ～。引退して、この店をひらいたんだけど…
まする	摩する	vs-s, vt	to rub, to scrub, to scrape,to draw near, to press	Stay outta this.	じゃまするな
ばんぜん	万全	n, adj-no, adj-na	perfection, flawlessness	The President is safe because we're here.	オレたちが来たからには社長の警備は万全だ、と
サボる		v5r, vi	to be truant, to play hooky, to skip school, to skip out, to be idle, to sabotage by slowness	Just when I think the job's boring, you guys start messing around.	先輩たち、つまらない仕事だとすぐさぼるんだから
かくべつ	格別	adv	particular, special, exceptional, especial,particularly, especially, exceptionally	Booze, booze! Ain't nothing like booze when you're on the clock.	お酒、お酒！勤務中に飲むさけは格別だな
じょうれん	常連	n, adj-no	regular customer, regular patron, frequenter,constant companion	All my regular customers were killed by Weapon.	ウェポンにやられて常連さん、みんな死んじゃったの
さけびたり	酒浸り	n	liquor-soaked,continuous drinking, daily drinking, binge drinking	Looks like something's going on outside, but we're too smashed to do anything…	なんだか外は騒がしいけどおれたちゃ、ひるまっから酒びたり…
ここち	心地	suf	feeling, sensation, mood,sensation of doing	Ooh, oohh… Oh man, my head's burning up…	ゲホッゲホッ……なんだか、あたまあつい心地
うちあげる	打ち上げる	v1, vt	to launch, to shoot up,(of waves) to dash, to wash up (ashore),to finish (e.g. a theater run, sumo tournament), to close,to report (to boss, etc.)	The Shinra people are having a party tonight, and we're all booked up.	今夜は神羅の人の打ち上げパーティで店がいっぱいになるんですよ。どうです、あなたもいらしてみたら？
ねんき	年季	n	period of an apprentice's contract (usu. ten years),apprenticeship, indentureship, indenture,one-year period	Seems like you're all a little too young to be in here.	まだみなさん年期がたりんようですな
マスク		n	(face) mask,(facial) features, looks,mask (e.g. for circuit etching)	Then, take your mask off and come here. That's our rule.	そうなら、マスクとってこいよ。それがオレたちのルールだ
わかめ	若布	n	wakame (species of edible brown seaweed, Undaria pinnatifida)	Seaweed… Seaweed…	わかめ……わかめ……
もりあがる	盛り上がる	v5r, vi	to swell, to rise, to bulge, to be piled up,to rouse, to get excited	It just isn't a party without Rude!	えんかいリーダーのルードさんがいないとどうももりあがんないなあ
よわる	弱る	v5r, vi	to weaken, to grow weak, to wane, to decline (of one's health),to be downcast, to be dejected, to be dispirited,to be troubled, to be at a loss, to be perplexed, to be annoyed	I'd like to close down this shop, but we got the regulars to think about. I don't know what to do…	ほんとはお店しめちゃいたいんだけど常連さんがいるしねえ。よわっちゃいましたよ
へいしゃ	兵舎	n	barracks	Barracks	兵舎
みあたる	見当たる	v5r	to be found	And I can't find the uniform I left in my locker, either. I wonder where I forgot it?	ロッカーに入れといた制服も見あたらないし。どこかに忘れてきたのかなあ
もしや	若しや	adv	perhaps, possibly, by some chance, by some possibility	Geez! Do you think this is what they call 'hazing?'	はっ！　もしや、これは…イジメというやつでは
おさき	御先	n	going before, the future	Oh man, My future in the military is pretty bleak.	ああ～ボクの軍隊生活、お先まっくら
マンツーマン		n	man-to-man, one-to-one	Ever since I was late to that parade, they've been on my back everyday with basic training.	パレードに遅刻したあの日から毎日毎日、マンツーマンのきそくんれん
ベテラン		n, adj-no	person with a lot of experience, old hand, veteran (in a particular field)	Only veterans can go through! Come back when you've grown up.	ここはベテランしか通さん！出直してきなさい
しかく	資格	n	qualifications, requirements, capabilities	Hmmm? You have no right to enter!	むっ？おまえは入る資格なし！
なんとなく	何となく	adv	somehow or other, for some reason or another, without knowing why	I'm starting to feel like I can't stop anymore.	なんとなくやめられなくなってしまったでありま～す！！
ラック		n	rack,ruck,luck	Received "Luck Source"!	『ラックアップ』を手にいれた！
ぜん	善	n	good, goodness, right, virtue	As a man with promise and future, I don't have any time to fool around like the rest of you.	ぜんとゆうぼうな自分は諸君らのように遊んでるひまなどないのです
うとうと		adv, adv-to, vs	falling into a doze, dozing off, nodding off	Ugh…My eyes are tired… No, I've got to really buckle down!	ウトウト…目がかすむ……。いや、ここががんばりどき！
かすむ	霞む	v5m, vi	to become misty, to become hazy,to get blurry, to grow dim,to be overshadowed, to be upstaged, to be outshone	Ugh…My eyes are tired… No, I've got to really buckle down!	ウトウト…目がかすむ……。いや、ここががんばりどき！
しんぼう	辛抱	n, vs	patience, endurance	At least until I become SOLDIER First Class.	ソルジャークラス１ＳＴになるまでのしんぼうしんぼう
べんきょう	勉強	n, vs	study,diligence,discount, reduction	Oh, of course, I was here, studying.	あっ、もちろん自分はここで勉強してたんですがね
まぼろし	幻	n, adj-no	phantom, vision, illusion, dream, apparition	That coveted green officer's uniform is almost in my reach.	幻のみどり色の制服……上級仕官はもうすぐ自分のものですよ
じょうきゅう	上級	n	advanced level, high grade, senior	That coveted green officer's uniform is almost in my reach.	幻のみどり色の制服……上級仕官はもうすぐ自分のものですよ
しかん	仕官	n, vs	government service, entering government service,(of a ronin) finding a new lord or master to serve	That coveted green officer's uniform is almost in my reach.	幻のみどり色の制服……上級仕官はもうすぐ自分のものですよ
しふく	私服	n	civilian clothes, plain clothes, mufti,plainclothes police officer	Then I'll be on the newspapers as a plain clothed First Class officer in SOLDIER…	そのあとは、私服組のソルジャークラス１ＳＴで新聞に名前をのせて……
がいせん	凱旋	n, vs	triumphal return	Then make a triumphant return to my homeland!! Tons of fan letters… My future's peachy!	故郷へがいせん帰国！！ファンレターの山……自分の未来はモモ色だなあ
きこく	帰国	n, vs	return to one's country	Then make a triumphant return to my homeland!! Tons of fan letters… My future's peachy!	故郷へがいせん帰国！！ファンレターの山……自分の未来はモモ色だなあ
ファン		n	fan, enthusiast, lover,fan (e.g. electric),fun	Then make a triumphant return to my homeland!! Tons of fan letters… My future's peachy!	故郷へがいせん帰国！！ファンレターの山……自分の未来はモモ色だなあ
レター		n	letter	Then make a triumphant return to my homeland!! Tons of fan letters… My future's peachy!	故郷へがいせん帰国！！ファンレターの山……自分の未来はモモ色だなあ
もも	桃	n	peach (Prunus persica)	Then make a triumphant return to my homeland!! Tons of fan letters… My future's peachy!	故郷へがいせん帰国！！ファンレターの山……自分の未来はモモ色だなあ
パワーアップ		n, vs	powering up	Received "Power Source"!	『パワーアップ』を手にいれた！
ふりょう	不良	n, adj-no, adj-na	bad, poor, inferior,delinquent, hoodlum, hooligan	Don't become a bad worker like me.	オレみたいな不良社員になっちまうなよ
しゅくしゃ	宿舎	n	lodging house	These barracks are for soldiers. This is no place for civilians.	ここはオレたち兵士の宿舎だ。一般人がうろつく場所じゃないぞ
みならい	見習い	n, adj-no	apprenticeship, probation, learning by observation,apprentice, trainee, probationer	I'm trying to be a bad soldier!!	不良社員見習いであります！！
もえつきる	燃え尽きる	v1, vi	to burn out	Shinra Manager	もえつき神羅課長
じょうそう	上層	n	upper stratum (classes, stories, storeys)	If Weapon killed all the upper management… then I'll be President!!	上層部がウェポンに殺されちまえばワタシが社長に……！！
こころゆく	心ゆく	v5k-s, vi	to be completely satisfied, to be completely contented	You should absorb all the wisdom until it is a part of you.	どうぞ心ゆくまでもてる知識をひろうするがよい
ふくしゅう	復讐	n, vs	revenge	OK, Mr. Know-it-all, ex-SOLDIER! Let me revenge…I mean, review!	物知り元ソルジャーさんよ！復讐……いや復習させてくれよ
ふくしゅう	復習	n, vs	review, revision	OK, Mr. Know-it-all, ex-SOLDIER! Let me revenge…I mean, review!	物知り元ソルジャーさんよ！復讐……いや復習させてくれよ
かせぐ	稼ぐ	v5g, vi	to earn (income), to make (money),to score (points, victory), to gain (time), to play (for time),to work hard (at one's job), to labor, to labour, to toil	When you get Wiped Out, you can continue from your last Save Point. Your Experience points will not change.	【全滅】したときに前の【セーブポイント】からかせいだ経験値はそのままのこるという
へん	編	n, n-suf, ctr	compilation (of a text), editing,volume (of a text),completed literary work	This is the Beginner's Hall (Intermediate)!	まいどおなじみ初心者の館（復活編）だよ～ん！
ストレス		n	stress	OK wise-guy, I'll ask about Materia just so you can let off some stress.	物知りさん、あんたのストレス解消にマテリアの話を聞いてあげるよ
かいしょう	解消	n, vs	cancellation, liquidation, resolution, reduction (e.g. of stress)	OK wise-guy, I'll ask about Materia just so you can let off some stress.	物知りさん、あんたのストレス解消にマテリアの話を聞いてあげるよ
たんとうちょくにゅう	単刀直入	adj-na, adj-no, n	straight to the point, point-blank, frank, direct	First off, the main points.	単刀直入に要点からきりだそう
ようてん	要点	n	gist, main point	First off, the main points.	単刀直入に要点からきりだそう
きりだす	切り出す	v5s, vt	to quarry, to cut (timber), to cut and carry off,to begin to talk, to break the ice, to broach,to start a fire (with flint, by rubbing sticks together, etc.),to select and extract (from a media file), to splice out	First off, the main points.	単刀直入に要点からきりだそう
しょうかん	召喚	n, vs, adj-no	summons, summonsing, citation, subpoena, arraigning, calling, summoning	Some, like Summon Magic, grow from being used once a battle, to several times per battle.	召喚のように一回のバトルで使える回数が増えてゆくもの
どくりつ	独立	n, vs	independence, self-reliance, supporting oneself, being on one's own,independence (e.g. of a nation), freedom,separation, isolation	[Independent Materia] enables Abilities. No linking required.	【独立マテリア】つけていればアビリティが機能するマテリア。
きのう	機能	n, vs	function, facility, faculty, feature	[Independent Materia] enables Abilities. No linking required.	【独立マテリア】つけていればアビリティが機能するマテリア。
しえん	支援	n, vs	support, backing, aid, assistance	[Support Materia] is used with Command, Magic, and Summon Materia.	【支援マテリア】コマンドや魔法、召喚マテリアと組にしてつかうマテリア。
れんけつ	連結	n, vs, adj-na, adj-no	concatenation, coupling, connection, linking, consolidation (e.g. of company accounts)	You must equip them in linked slots or they won't be any good.	連結穴にセットしないと何の意味もない。
レベルアップ		n, vs	raising the level (of), boosting, improving, improvement, rising to the next level	[Magic Materia] is easy. You can use Magic, and as your Level increases, you'll learn new Magic.	【魔法マテリア】これはおなじみだな。魔法が使えるようになる。レベルアップで新しい魔法をどんどん覚えていく。
おきにいり	お気に入り	exp	favorite, favourite, pet (e.g. teacher's pet),bookmark (in web browser)	This's one of my favorites.	俺もお気に入りのマテリアだ。
ひとすじ	一筋	adj-na	one long straight object (e.g. strand of hair, beam of light, wisp of smoke),a single bloodline,earnest, resolute, intent, devoted,ordinary, common	There's no single way to combine Materia. So here goes the basics.	マテリアの組み合わせ方か。ひとすじなわではいかない。ここでは基本のおさらいといこう
おんしゅう	温習	n, vs	review, rehearsal	There's no single way to combine Materia. So here goes the basics.	マテリアの組み合わせ方か。ひとすじなわではいかない。ここでは基本のおさらいといこう
たんたい	単体	n	simple substance (e.g. chemical),something standing alone, separate item	You can change between Magic-All and Magic with [PAGEUP/PAGEDOWN]. I'll bet you've probably already done this.	魔法などの全体化／単体の切りかえはＬ１／Ｒ１ボタンで可能だ。当然、使いこなしているだろうな
つかいこなす	使いこなす	v5s, vt	to handle (men), to master (a tool), to manage, to acquire a command of (a language)	You can change between Magic-All and Magic with [PAGEUP/PAGEDOWN]. I'll bet you've probably already done this.	魔法などの全体化／単体の切りかえはＬ１／Ｒ１ボタンで可能だ。当然、使いこなしているだろうな
はりつける	貼り付ける	v1, vt	to paste, to stick, to affix,to station, to post	If you equip this combination to your weapon, you can put Magic and Summon Elementals on your weapon.	この組み合わせを武器に装備すると魔法や召喚の【属性】を武器にはりつけることができる
それる	逸れる	v1, vi	to turn away, to bear off, to veer away, to swerve from, to miss (e.g. a target),to deviate (e.g. of a conversation), to digress, to to go astray, to wander	I'm getting off the subject,… If you equip Fire + Elemental to your armor, it will have twice the resistance to fire damage.	さらに、話はそれるが……【炎】＋【属性】を防具に装備すれば【炎のダメージ半減の防具】になる
はんげん	半減	n, vs	reduction by half, halving	I'm getting off the subject,… If you equip Fire + Elemental to your armor, it will have twice the resistance to fire damage.	さらに、話はそれるが……【炎】＋【属性】を防具に装備すれば【炎のダメージ半減の防具】になる
むこう	無効	adj-no, adj-na, n	invalid, void, ineffective, unavailable	When the Elemental levels in your armor increase, so will their effectiveness. From half damage - no damage - absorb.	防具に限っては、さらにお得なことに【属性】がレベルアップすれば『半減→無効→吸収』と効果が上がるのだ
きゅうしゅう	吸収	n, vs	absorption, suction, attraction	When the Elemental levels in your armor increase, so will their effectiveness. From half damage - no damage - absorb.	防具に限っては、さらにお得なことに【属性】がレベルアップすれば『半減→無効→吸収』と効果が上がるのだ
くみあわせる	組み合わせる	v1, vt	to join together, to combine, to join up	If you combined Elemental and Fire you could develop Fire absorbing armor.	レベルアップした【属性】と【炎】を組み合わせれば【炎を吸収する防具】も作れるというわけだ
ついか	追加	n, vs, adj-no	addition, supplement, appending, appendix	Wait, there's more. Next is the Added Effect for Support Materia.	さらに続けるとしよう。【追加効果】の支援マテリアの使い方だ
けい	系	n, n-suf	system, lineage, group,corollary,system (range of strata that correspond to a particular time period),(taxonomical) series	The Added Effect Materia grafts the effects of Compound Status Materia into your weapons and armor.	【追加効果】マテリアは、組み合わせたステータス変化系のマテリアの効果を武器や防具にはりつけるためのものだ
ひきおこす	引き起こす	v5s, vt	to cause, to induce, to bring about, to provoke,to pull upright, to help up (e.g. a fallen person)	For example, equip Added Effect + Poison to your weapon and select [Attack]. Sometimes you'll make a Poison attack.	例えば、【追加効果】＋【毒】を武器につければ『たたかう』で攻撃したときに追加効果として【毒】のステータス異常をひきおこすことが可能だ。
まどわす	惑わす	v5s, vt	to bewilder, to perplex, to puzzle, to delude, to mislead, to deceive,to tempt, to seduce	If you don't combine the Added Effect Materia with Status Change Materia, like Confusion or Time, you won't get any effect.	【追加効果】のマテリアは【まどわす】や【時間】などステータス変化系のマテリアと組み合わせなければ意味がない
たっする	達する	vs-s	to reach, to get to, to arrive at	Once your Materia reaches the maximum level, it will divide.	マテリアは最高ＬＶにたっするとぶんれつする。
あらた	新た	adj-na, n	new, fresh, novel	New Materia always starts out with zero AP, so you need to raise its levels!	新たに生まれたマテリアはＡＰが０の状態なのでこちらは、育てなければならない
めいもく	名目	n, adj-no	name, title, appellation, (something) nominal,(under the) pretext (of), pretense	Since we're fighting for the life of the Planet, it goes against my beliefs to carry too much Materia.	なぜなら、俺たちは、名目上星の命を守るために戦っている。故に、マテリアの持ちすぎは理念に反してる
すぎ	過ぎ	n, n-suf	past, after,too (much), over- (e.g. eating)	Since we're fighting for the life of the Planet, it goes against my beliefs to carry too much Materia.	なぜなら、俺たちは、名目上星の命を守るために戦っている。故に、マテリアの持ちすぎは理念に反してる
りねん	理念	n	(Platonic) ideal (of how things ought to be, e.g. human rights), foundational principle, idea, conception (e.g. of the university), doctrine, ideology	Since we're fighting for the life of the Planet, it goes against my beliefs to carry too much Materia.	なぜなら、俺たちは、名目上星の命を守るために戦っている。故に、マテリアの持ちすぎは理念に反してる
いいだす	言い出す	v5s, vt	to begin to say, to start talking, to broach (a matter), to bring up, to come out with,to be the first to say, to suggest (doing), to propose	Either way, I don't really care but, I'll leave it up to you.	……もちろん、これは俺の考えじゃない。だれが言い出したかは想像に任せるよ
てばなす	手放す	v5s, vt	to let go of, to release, to drop,to part with (e.g. a possession), to relinquish, to spare, to sell,to send away (e.g. one's child), to let go, to part with,to temporarily stop working	When you have too much Materia, you need to dispose of some. If you don't, you can't take on any more.	マテリアがいっぱいの時は一度マテリアを手放してからでないとひろうこともできないし、買うこともできない
きゅうきょく	究極	adj-no, n	ultimate, final, last, eventual	Extreme Limits	リミット究極技
ひたすら	只管	adv, adj-na	intently, single‐mindedly, devotedly, solely, earnestly, with all one's heart	There are 2 basic ways of building up your Limit techniques. First, just use them!	リミット技を育てる基本は、２つ。まずひとつは、ひたすらリミット技を使うことだ
おおく	多く	adv, adj-no	many, much, largely, abundantly, mostly	And second is to finish off as many enemies as possible! It sounds easier than it is.	もうひとつは、より多くの敵にとどめをさす！かんたんそうだが、意外とむずかしい
もはや	最早	adv	already, now,no longer, not any more	Everyone knows that when you gain a new Limit technique, you need to select it in the menu.	もはや常識だが、新たなレベルのリミット技を覚えたら、メニューでリミットレベルをセットしなおさなければならない
あみだす	編み出す	v5s, vt	to work out, to think out, to devise, to invent	And you know that you won't be able to use advanced techniques on each level if you haven't used the basic ones.	……まさか、わすれてないだろうな。各レベルの上級技はそのレベルの基本技を使っていないとあみだすことはできないからな
さ	差	n	difference, variation,difference	Since the type and growth for each limit techniques is different, that's about all I will say.	リミット技の成長・種類には、個人差があるから俺に言えることはこれくらいだ
つうろ	通路	n	passage, pathway, roadway, avenue, aisle	Junon Path	ジュノン・通路
てんけん	点検	n, vs	inspection, examination, checking	What is it? The elevator's out of order for an inspection.	なんだい？いま、定期点検中なんでエレベーターは動かせないよ
しょうもう	消耗	n, vs	exhaustion, consumption, using up, dissipation, waste	Mako energy puts a lot of wear and tear on the machinery.	魔晄エネルギーは機械のしょうもうがはげしいからね
まめ	忠実	adj-na, n	diligent, hardworking, conscientious, sincere,healthy, fit,faithful, devoted	A lot of problems can pop up. So it's necessary for close inspections and maintenance.	あちこちガタがくるのがはやいんだ。まめな点検と整備がかかせないのさ
せいび	整備	n, vs	maintenance, servicing,putting in place, establishment, development, preparation, provision, outfitting	A lot of problems can pop up. So it's necessary for close inspections and maintenance.	あちこちガタがくるのがはやいんだ。まめな点検と整備がかかせないのさ
せいか	成果	n	(good) result, outcome, fruits (of one's labors), product, accomplishment	All right!! Let's see how hard you trained!	うっし！！くんれんの成果をみせちゃれ！
ゆうぐん	友軍	n, adj-no	friendly army, friendly troops, allied army	Our forces are in the process of gathering the Huge Materia from the Corel and the Fort Condor Reactors!	我が友軍は～　現在【コレル魔晄炉】と～【コンドルフォート魔晄炉】の～ヒュージマテリア回収大作戦を実行中だ！
かいしゅう	回収	n, vs	collection, recovery, withdrawal, retrieval	Our forces are in the process of gathering the Huge Materia from the Corel and the Fort Condor Reactors!	我が友軍は～　現在【コレル魔晄炉】と～【コンドルフォート魔晄炉】の～ヒュージマテリア回収大作戦を実行中だ！
たいしょう	対象	n, adj-no	target, object (of worship, study, etc.), subject (of taxation, etc.)	Once these two missions are completed, the Underwater Reactor will be our next target!	その２つのミッションが終われば次はここの地下の海底魔晄炉が大作戦の対象にな～る
いっす	逸す	v5s	to lose (a chance), to miss (a chance),to overlook, to omit, to forget,to deviate, to depart from (the norm, etc.)	Till then, we do nothing but train, train, train!	それまでは、いっしょうけんめいくんれん、くんれん、くんれんだ！
リフト		n	lift,rift	This lift goes to the Shinra section.	このリフトは上の神羅カンパニー区画につながってんだが……
じぎょう	事業	n	project, enterprise, business, industry, operations, venture, service,act, deed, conduct	Free to Air Force personnel!	空軍のサービス事業なんでお代はいらないよ！
タクシー		n	taxi	Sure	タクシーよぶ
うんてん	運転	n, vs, adj-no	operation (of a machine, etc.), operating, running, run,driving,working (capital, etc.)	Roger!! Hey! Taxi!!	ラジャ！！へい！　運転手さん！！
よう	酔う	v5u, vi	to get drunk, to become intoxicated,to feel sick (e.g. in a vehicle), to become nauseated,to be elated, to be exalted, to be spellbound, to be in raptures	But if you get airsick easily, maybe you'd better not go.	車に酔いやすい人はやめたほうがいいかもね
いざる	躄る	v5r, vi	to shuffle (on one's bottom or knees), to crawl,to shift position (of an object)	This is it!! Junon Military Reception!	いざっ本番！！ジュノン軍隊式お見送り～！
ぐんじん	軍人	n	military personnel, soldier	Do it right! Do it with enthusiasm! Ready…!	軍人らし～く　元気よ～くさんはいっ！
こうかん	好感	n	good feeling, good will, favourable impression, favorable impression	President's Mood Gauge	社長好感度
げんきゅう	減給	n, vs, adj-no	pay cut, salary cut	With things looking this bad, you better get ready for cutbacks.	このせいせきでは、減給もありうると思ってくれたまえ
ぜんりょく	全力	n, adj-no	all one's power (strength, energy, efforts), one's utmost	Keep up the good work for Shinra, Inc.	今後も我が神羅カンパニーのため全力をつくしてもらいたい
つくす	尽くす	aux-v	to exhaust, to run out,to devote, to serve (a person), to befriend,to do to exhaustion	Keep up the good work for Shinra, Inc.	今後も我が神羅カンパニーのため全力をつくしてもらいたい
ボーナス		n	bonus	Gya haa ha!! Here's a special bonus for you!!	ガハハハハハ！！特別ボーナスだぞ、おまえら！！
こうい	好意	n	kindness, favor, favour, friendliness,goodwill, affection, liking (for someone), love	A token of the President's kindness! Don't forget it!	ルーファウス社長のご好意だ！きもに命じとけ！
ぎんぶち	銀縁	n	silver-rimmed	Received "Silver Glasses"!	『銀縁メガネ』を手にいれた！
めがね	眼鏡	n	glasses, eyeglasses, spectacles,judgment, judgement, discrimination, discernment, insight	Received "Silver Glasses"!	『銀縁メガネ』を手にいれた！
ひろまる	広まる	v5r, vi	to spread, to be propagated	Once the word gets out that Sephiroth's here, CLOUD and his friends will show up, too.	セフィロスがここに来たというウワサがひろまればCLOUDたちもあらわれるはずだ
しだい	次第	n	depending on,as soon as, immediately (upon),in accordance with,order, program, programme, precedence,circumstances, course of events, reason	We'll crush them as soon as we find them!	みつけしだいヒネリつぶします！
そうさく	捜索	n, vs	search (esp. for someone or something missing), manhunt,legally authorized search of a person, building, etc.	Heidegger's been forced to take over that investigation, too.	ハイデッカーはその捜索もまかされたらしいからな
おもいつく	思いつく	v5k, vt, vi	to think of, to hit upon, to come into one's mind, to be struck with an idea,to remember, to recall	Priscilla remembered it after you climbed the pole. But don't be mad at her.	おまえが柱をのぼったあとプリシラが思いついたんだ。悪く思うな
むける	向ける	v1, vt	to turn towards, to point	We'll cross the ocean, to the new continent.	俺たちは新たな大陸に向け、海を渡る
ぐんぷく	軍服	n	military uniform	…even if we are wearing Shinra's uniforms…	神羅の軍服につつまれながら……
つつむ	包む	v5m	to wrap up, to tuck in, to pack, to do up, to cover with, to dress in,to conceal, to hide, to be engulfed in, to be enveloped by	…even if we are wearing Shinra's uniforms…	神羅の軍服につつまれながら……
けいき	景気	n	business conditions, the market, economic activity, economic climate,good (economic) times, prosperity, boom,liveliness, energy, vigour, vigor, spirit	Lately the economy seems to be improving. Must be the 'Rufus' effect.	最近、ルーファウス効果ってやつで景気がよくなってね
しゅっこう	出航	n, vs	departure (of a boat, plane), setting sail, leaving port, putting out to sea, takeoff	Cargo ships are always coming and going from Costa del Sol.	運搬船はいつでもコスタ・デル・ソルに出航してるんだ
みっこう	密航	n, vs	smuggling	I'll forget you're being stowaways, if you help with the cargo.	密航者もおおめに見てやるけどにもつ運びぐらいは手伝えよな
うなばら	海原	n	ocean, sea, the deep	The sun disappears like it's being swallowed up by the big horizon.	大きな海原につつまれるように消えていく太陽
みち	未知	adj-no, n	not yet known, unknown, strange	And somewhere out there is a big unknown continent with another port city.	その先に広がる未知の大陸。そして、そこにもまた港街さ
たそがれ	黄昏	n	dusk, twilight,twilight years,melancholia, melancholic nostalgia	Twilight always gets me misty…	こんなたそがれ時にはしみじみ思っちゃうわけよ
ロマンチスト		n	romanticist	I haven't had a girlfriend in 18 years. And I'm a romantic! …geez.	ロマンチストのこの俺も今年で彼女いない歴１８年。……ふぅ
れき	歴	suf	history of, experience of	I haven't had a girlfriend in 18 years. And I'm a romantic! …geez.	ロマンチストのこの俺も今年で彼女いない歴１８年。……ふぅ
そうどう	騒動	n, vs	strife, riot, rebellion, turmoil,(media) uproar, brouhaha, (public) outcry, scandal, controversy,feud, tussle, quarrel, dispute	Well…I wouldn't have time for one now anyway because of Weapon…	あっ！　いまはウェポン騒動でそれどころじゃないんだけどね