のれん	暖簾	n	(short) curtain hung at shop entrance, split curtain used to divide spaces in a house,reputation (of a store), good name, credit,goodwill	Where are the others?	他のれんちゅう？
きかん	機関	n	engine,agency, organisation, organization, institution, organ, body,system, facility, facilities	…the Engine Room… …a suspicious…character…	……機関室に……不審……人物……
キリキリ		adv	chafing, grinding (e.g. teeth),binding tightly, pulling tight (e.g. a bow),rotating quickly,hurting sharply,briskly, quickly, promptly, at once, right away	Hey, get to work!	コラ、きさまもキリキリはたらかんか！
とうかつ	統括	n, vs	unification, bringing together, generalization,control, supervision	Both the new President Rufus and Heidegger are aboard this ship!	いま、この船にはルーファウス新社長と本社のハイデッガー統括が乗船されている！
じょうせん	乗船	n	embarking (a ship), embarkation, boarding,ship (carrying someone)	Both the new President Rufus and Heidegger are aboard this ship!	いま、この船にはルーファウス新社長と本社のハイデッガー統括が乗船されている！
しょうしん	昇進	n, vs, adj-no	promotion, advancement, rising in rank	If we do good, we could get promoted!	うまくすれば昇進のチャンスだぞ！
のろう	呪う	v5u, vt	to curse, to put a curse on, to detest intensely	Let's ride the Airship together, OK? Promise, promise me!	一練にのろうね、飛空艇。約束、約束！
チーフ		n	chief	The only one who's gonna benefit from this is the Chief, anyway.	どうせトクするのはあそこのチーフだけ
のんき	呑気	adj-na, n	carefree, optimistic, careless, reckless, heedless, happy-go-lucky, easygoing, thoughtless	How can he… Goin' off laughin' like that?	なんだあのヤロ……のんきにガハガハガハガハ笑いやがって……
いっそ		adv	rather, sooner, preferably	I'm gonna settle things here and now!	いっそのこと、ここで一気にカタをつけ……
かくいん	各員	n-adv, n-t	each one	Emergency alert! Reports of a stowaway found! Those not on detail, search the ship. Report when found!	緊急連絡！不審人物を発見の報告アリ！作業のない各員は監内を調査。発見しだい通報のこと！
つうほう	通報	n, vs	report, notification, tip, bulletin,message (in information and communication theory)	Emergency alert! Reports of a stowaway found! Those not on detail, search the ship. Report when found!	緊急連絡！不審人物を発見の報告アリ！作業のない各員は監内を調査。発見しだい通報のこと！
はりきる	張り切る	v5r	to be in high spirits, to be full of vigor (vigour), to be enthusiastic, to be eager, to stretch to breaking point	Uh, yes sir, I'll continue my watch sir!  Hee hee…	それでは、はりきって見張りをつづけるであります！フフフ……
ガッツ		n	guts	A seaman's gotta have umph!	海の男はガッツだ、ガッツ！
クルー		n	crew	Say, who are you? You're not a part of the crew.	ん、何だお前？この船のクルーじゃねえな？
スーパー		adj-f	supermarket,subtitles, telop,superheterodyne,super	I got just the perfect thing! Invisible Alpha'-- A super drink for seamen!!	そういう時はコイツ！海の男のスーパードリンク『インビンシブルα』！！
ふなのり	船乗り	n	getting on board,sailor, seaman	Thanks! This is a necessity for a sailor.	まいど！コイツは船乗りにかかせねえ品だぜ
マスト		n	mast,necessary, mandatory, indispensable,must, [object Object]	This is a must item for a sailor! Ha ha ha !	船乗りだけにこれがホントのマストアイテム！ワッハッハッハ！
つきすすむ	突き進む	v5m, vi	to push on, to plunge forward, to push one's way to	Thanks! Now let's get on with it!	まいど！コイツでガンガンつきすすもうぜ
ケチケチ		adv, vs	stingy, tightfisted, miserly	Hey! Seamen shouldn't be so stingy!	オウオウ！海の男がケチケチすんない！
ビーチ		n	beach	When I get there, I'm going to take a long overdue vacation. Maybe I'll go down to the beach and get a tan…	向こうについたらひさしぶりの休みだ。ビーチで体をやこうかな……
てこ	梃子	n	lever	You don't think that suspicious stowaway is…	てことは不審人物ってのはまさか……
くつ	靴	n	shoe, shoes, boots, footwear, footgear	These clothes are too tight on me. Can I switch with you?	この服はきゅうくつだ。できればそっちに加わりたい
くわわる	加わる	v5r, vi	to be added to, to be appended,to join in (e.g. a group of friends), to participate,to increase (e.g. heat), to gain in (e.g. influence), to grow, to gather (speed),to be applied (e.g. heat, pressure), to be exerted	These clothes are too tight on me. Can I switch with you?	この服はきゅうくつだ。できればそっちに加わりたい
きる	斬る	v5r, vt	to kill (a human) using a blade (sword, machete, knife, etc.), to slice (off), to lop (off), to cut (off)	Received "Wind Slash"!	『風斬り』を手にいれた！
ねむり	眠り	n	sleep, sleeping,inactivity,death	…After a long sleep…	……長き眠りをへて……
せつがん	接岸	n, vs	coming alongside a pier, quay, etc., reaching land (of a boat)	Dock workers--We will be docking in Costa del Sol in 5 minutes. Prepare for docking.	接岸作業員コスタ・デル・ソル入港５分前接岸準備を開始せよ
いん	員	n, n-suf	member	Dock workers--We will be docking in Costa del Sol in 5 minutes. Prepare for docking.	接岸作業員コスタ・デル・ソル入港５分前接岸準備を開始せよ
にゅうこう	入港	n, vs	entry into port, arriving in harbor	Dock workers--We will be docking in Costa del Sol in 5 minutes. Prepare for docking.	接岸作業員コスタ・デル・ソル入港５分前接岸準備を開始せよ
せいり	整理	n, vs	sorting, arrangement, organization, putting in order, adjustment, regulation,liquidation, settlement, consolidation, clearance (e.g. debt), paying off,retrenchment, curtailment, cutting down, disposal	CLOUD, why don't you explain to me what's happened so far?	CLOUD、ちょっとここまでを整理してくれねえか？
こんがらがる		v5r, vi	to become entangled, to become complicated, to get mixed up, to screw up, to get caught up in	I'm getting so confused…	こんがらがってきちゃった……
さほど	然程	adv, conj	not so, not particularly, not very, not that much	Hmm… The story's not that simple.	フム……話はさほど単純ではなさそうだ。
はさむ	挟む	v5m, vt	to hold between (e.g. one's fingers, chopsticks), to grip (from both sides),to put between, to sandwich between, to insert, to interpose,to catch (e.g. a finger in a door), to trap, to pinch,to insert (e.g. a break into proceedings), to interpose (e.g. an objection), to interject, to throw in (e.g. a joke),to be on either side of (a road, table, etc.), to have between each other, to be across (a street, river, etc.),to harbour (feelings), to cast (e.g. doubt)	…I'll try, but don't interrupt me while I'm explaining.	……やってみるから途中で口をはさまないでくれよ
いとこ	従兄弟	n	cousin (male)	Whoa! We'd best hurry and hide somewhere.	おおっと！はやいとこ隠れたほうがよさそうだぜ