せいせい	生成	n, vs	creation, generation, formation, derivation	But I sure feel better now that I can say good-bye to this sailor suit.	だがよ、せいせいしたぜ！これで、ちっこいセーラー服とおさらばだからな
セーラーふく	セーラー服	n	sailor suit, middy uniform	But I sure feel better now that I can say good-bye to this sailor suit.	だがよ、せいせいしたぜ！これで、ちっこいセーラー服とおさらばだからな
おさらば		n, vs	good-bye, farewell	But I sure feel better now that I can say good-bye to this sailor suit.	だがよ、せいせいしたぜ！これで、ちっこいセーラー服とおさらばだからな
すいへい	水兵	n	(naval) sailor	Oh, too bad. I liked BARRET's sailor suit. He looked so cute.	あら残念、BARRETの水兵姿。かわいかったのに、けっこう
パジャマ		n, adj-no	pajamas, pyjamas	BARRET, why don't you use that sailor suit for pajamas?	BARRET、あのセーラー服パジャマにしなさい
バカンス		n	holidays, vacation	Remember, this isn't a vacation. We're here after Sephiroth.	俺たちはバカンスで来たんじゃない。セフィロスを追うんだ
みちくさ	道草	n	loitering on the way,wayside grass	Hmmph, CLOUD. You're the one who's always hangin' around wastin' time.	ケッ！！　CLOUDさんよ。道草が好きなのは、おまえさんだろ
リゾート		n	resort	I'm going to skip this resort!	こんな場ちがいなリゾート地はすっ飛ばしていくぜ！！
すっとぶ	素っ飛ぶ	v5b, vi	to rush off, to rush away, to vanish	I'm going to skip this resort!	こんな場ちがいなリゾート地はすっ飛ばしていくぜ！！
マシュマロ		n	marshmallow	Ahhh… You look like a bear wearing a marshmallow.	ああ…マシュマロかぶったクマみたいでぴったりだったな
かぶる	被る	v5r, vi	to put on (one's head), to wear, to have on, to pull over (one's head), to crown (oneself),to be covered with (dust, snow, etc.), to pour (water, etc.) on oneself, to dash on oneself, to ship water,to bear (e.g. someone's debts, faults, etc.), to take (blame), to assume (responsibility), to shoulder (burden),to overlap (e.g. sound or color),to be similar, to be redundant,to be fogged (due to overexposure, etc.),to close, to come to an end,to get a full house, to sell out,to blunder, to bungle, to fail,to be deceived	Ahhh… You look like a bear wearing a marshmallow.	ああ…マシュマロかぶったクマみたいでぴったりだったな
くま	熊	n	bear (any mammal of family Ursidae)	Ahhh… You look like a bear wearing a marshmallow.	ああ…マシュマロかぶったクマみたいでぴったりだったな
いっちょうら	一帳羅	n	one's (only) good suit (or kimono)	The hell's that supposed to mean!? This happens to be the most comfortable, so shu'up!	なにっ！！　よけいな世話だ！オレはこの一張羅がいちばん落ちつくんだ
かわく	渇く	v5k, vi	to be thirsty, to feel thirsty,to thirst for, to crave	Would you kindly hurry? The heat here is drying my nose.	すまないが、少し急いでくれないか。ここは暑い、私のアカハナがかわいてしまう
きゅうし	休止	n, vs, adj-no	pause, cessation, rest	All right. We'll take a break and then head off.	わかった。小休止の後、出発する
きどり	気どり	n	affectation, pretension	I'll wander wherever I damn well want! Who made him the leader?	チッ！すっかりリーダー気取りだな
のける	退ける	v1, aux-v	to put something out of the way, to move (something, someone) aside,to remove, to exclude, to take away,to set aside, to keep apart,to remove (someone) from the group, to shun,to do well despite difficulties, to accomplish despite adversity,to do resolutely, to do boldly	It looks like my mane got messed up.	じまんのけなみがみだれてきたようだ
みだれる	乱れる	v1, vi	to be disordered, to be disarranged, to be disarrayed, to be disheveled, to be dishevelled,to be discomposed, to be upset, to get confused, to be disturbed,to lapse into chaos (due to war, etc.)	It looks like my mane got messed up.	じまんのけなみがみだれてきたようだ
およぐ	泳ぐ	v5g, vi	to swim	I think I'll go swimming.	およぎにいっちゃおうかな
くずれる	崩れる	v1, vi	to collapse, to crumble,to get out of shape, to lose one's shape, to become disorganized, to become untidy,to break down, to be thrown into disarray,to crash (stock market), to slump, to decline,to break money into small change,to turn bad (e.g. weather), to change for the worse, to deteriorate	Your cool exterior's cracking…	クールな顔がくずれてますよ～
いこい	憩い	n, adj-no	rest, relaxation	Well then, let's go!	さ、いこいこ！
ひやけ	日焼け	n, vs	sunburn, suntan, tan,becoming discolored from the sun (e.g. paper), yellowing	Maybe I should get a tan for a change.	たまには日焼けでもしちゃおっかな
やける	焼ける	v1, vi	to burn, to be roasted, to be heated, to be sunburnt, to fade (in the sun), to glow red (i.e. of the sky at sunset),to be jealous, to be envious	Maybe a healthy tan is nice	元気に焼けてるほうがいいかな
さんこう	参考	n, adj-no	reference, consultation	Got it. I'll remember that.	ハイっ、参考にしとくね
ちょうじかん	長時間	n-adv, n-t	long period of time, long playing	What a long boat ride that was!!	長時間の船旅おつかれさまです！！
ふなたび	船旅	n	trip by boat, sea voyage, cruise, sailing	What a long boat ride that was!!	長時間の船旅おつかれさまです！！
とりにがす	取り逃がす	v5s, vt	to miss (capturing), to fail to catch, to let slip	They all slipped through… You messed up big this time, Heidegger.	どちらも取り逃がした……。大失態だな、ハイデッカーくん
しったい	失態	n	blunder, fault, error, mistake, failure, disgrace	They all slipped through… You messed up big this time, Heidegger.	どちらも取り逃がした……。大失態だな、ハイデッカーくん
めんぼく	面目	n	face, honour, honor, reputation, prestige, dignity, credit,appearance, look	I'm ashamed of myself.	めんぼくない……です
はっしん	発進	n, vs	departure, takeoff	Ready for departure, sir!!	スキッフ発進準備完了いたしました！！
だいする	題する	vs-s	to be titled (e.g. a book), to be named	I'm the boss!	オレ、わかだいしょう！
ろうどう	労働	n, vs, adj-no	manual labor, manual labour, toil, work,Labour Party	But a bunch of hardworking deckhands like you wouldn't understand.	あなたたち、アクセク働く運搬船の労働者にはわからないでしょうねえ
ブルー		adj-na	blue (colour, color),sad, down (in the dumps)	On the marine blue sea, Gazing at the eternal skies that seem to go on forever… Gives you the feeling like you're taking a nap on the wing of a Cessna.	マリンブルーの海の上、どこまでも続くイターナルな空をながめながらセスナのつばさの上でおひるねする気分
つばさ	翼	suf, ctr	wing,Chinese "Wings" constellation (one of the 28 mansions),counter for birds or bird wings	On the marine blue sea, Gazing at the eternal skies that seem to go on forever… Gives you the feeling like you're taking a nap on the wing of a Cessna.	マリンブルーの海の上、どこまでも続くイターナルな空をながめながらセスナのつばさの上でおひるねする気分
きんぱつ	金髪	n, adj-no	blond hair	I'm talking about President Rufus. Charming, rich, blond… He even looks good in a double-breasted suit.	ルーファウス社長のことよ。魅力的よね、お金もってるし金髪だし、ダブルのスーツだし
ダブル		n	double,double bed, hotel room with a double bed,double-breasted,double-cuffed,double width (of cloth; usu. 1.42 meters),doubles (e.g. in tennis),biracial person (esp. half-Japanese), person of mixed parentage	I'm talking about President Rufus. Charming, rich, blond… He even looks good in a double-breasted suit.	ルーファウス社長のことよ。魅力的よね、お金もってるし金髪だし、ダブルのスーツだし
スーツ		n	suit (clothing),suit (playing cards)	I'm talking about President Rufus. Charming, rich, blond… He even looks good in a double-breasted suit.	ルーファウス社長のことよ。魅力的よね、お金もってるし金髪だし、ダブルのスーツだし
ヘラヘラ		adv, adv-to, vs	foolishly (laughing), thoughtlessly (smiling),indiscreetly (talking), carelessly (speaking), frivolously, flippantly,thin (paper, cloth, etc.), flimsy,flaring up, bursting into flames	Heh, heh… I hear the Shinra brass are arriving soon.	ヘラヘラ……もうじき、神羅のお偉方がつくんだってよ
じき	直	adj-no, n	soon, in a moment, before long, shortly,nearby, close,direct,spot transaction, cash transaction	Heh, heh… I hear the Shinra brass are arriving soon.	ヘラヘラ……もうじき、神羅のお偉方がつくんだってよ
おえらがた	お偉方	n	superiors, big shots, higher-ups, VIPs, dignitaries	Heh, heh… I hear the Shinra brass are arriving soon.	ヘラヘラ……もうじき、神羅のお偉方がつくんだってよ
へこむ	凹む	v5m, vi	to be dented, to be indented, to yield to, to give, to sink, to collapse, to cave in,to be overwhelmed, to feel down, to be forced to yield, to be daunted, to be snubbed	Put any fingerprints, scratches, or dents on that plane and I'll put one in your head!	しもんつけたり、傷つけたりへこませたりしたらただじゃおかないぞ
ぎょう	行	n	line (i.e. of text), row, verse,carya (austerities),samskara (formations),running script (a semi-cursive style of kanji)	Da plane, da plane!! This's something you'll never be able to do in your lifetime.	飛・行・機！！君たちには、一生手のとどかないしろもの
とこなつ	常夏	n	everlasting summer	Costa del Sol…a harbor paradise where the sun always shines and it's summer all year round!	ここは太陽ふりそそぐ常夏の楽園。コスタデルソルの港！
らくえん	楽園	n	pleasure garden, paradise	Costa del Sol…a harbor paradise where the sun always shines and it's summer all year round!	ここは太陽ふりそそぐ常夏の楽園。コスタデルソルの港！
かんこう	観光	n, vs, adj-no	sightseeing	Hmm…Things aren't going well… You can go sightseeing in the city.	う～ん、うまくいきません…。観光案内は、街のほうでどうぞ
しゅうしょく	就職	n, vs	finding employment, getting a job	The truth is, before I worked here, I was one of the best.	じつは、僕もここに就職する前ね。密航の常習者だったりなんかしちゃって
じょうしゅう	常習	n, vs, adj-no	custom, common practice, habit	The truth is, before I worked here, I was one of the best.	じつは、僕もここに就職する前ね。密航の常習者だったりなんかしちゃって
はつ	初	adj-no, n-pref, n	first, new	Don't bug me. This is Rufus's first official visit since becoming President.	じゃましないでくれよ。ルーファウスさんが社長就任以来初の到着なんだ
ようじ	用事	n	tasks, things to do, errand, business (to take care of), affairs, engagement	It seems like he's here on business this time.	今回はめずらしく仕事の用事みたいなんだけどね
ほめる	褒める	v1, vt	to praise, to admire, to speak well of someone	Rufus complimented me on my job!	ルーファウスさんにほめられちゃいましたよ！
がい	害	n	injury, harm, evil influence, damage	Wow!! I guess it pays to do good work.	いやあ～～仕事のしがいがあるってもんです
びしょびしょ		adv, adv-to	soaked, drenched, sopping, soppy, wet,incessantly (raining), drizzling	Damn. I'm soaking wet down to my underwear.	まいったなあ。パンツまでびしょびしょ
ちまた	巷	n	the public, the street (e.g. "word on the street"),street, district, quarters,location (e.g. of a battle), scene (e.g. of carnage),divide (e.g. between life and death),fork (in a road), crossroads	Oops! You must be those AVALANCHE guys!	あ！　あんたたち、もしかしてちまたで噂のアバランチの残堂！！
ちゅうこ	中古	n	used, second-hand, old,Middle Ages	Yep! Actually, we do have an old junker we're gonna get rid of, And I was thinking about going into the tourist business.	う～ん！中古の払い下げスキッフがあるんだけど観光客相手の商売でもはじめようかと思ってね
はらいさげ	払い下げ	n	disposal (usu. of unwanted government assets), sale	Yep! Actually, we do have an old junker we're gonna get rid of, And I was thinking about going into the tourist business.	う～ん！中古の払い下げスキッフがあるんだけど観光客相手の商売でもはじめようかと思ってね
ぞう	象	n	elephant (Elephantidae spp.)	I mean it, I'm really gonna quit!!	やめてやるっぞう！！
もち	餅	n	mochi, [object Object]	God, that sure felt good…	ああ、きもちいい……
とうぶん	当分	adv, n-t	for the present, for the time being,for a while, for some time	The transport ship won't be sailing for quite awhile. Heidegger's orders.	運搬船は、当分の間、出航しませんよ。ハイデッカーの指示なしにはね
はらす	晴らす	v5s, vt	to dispel, to clear away, to refresh (oneself),to accomplish a goal,to make it sunny, to make clouds disappear	Thinking of being stowaways?	ただし！！　僕にも家ではらすかせて待ってる家族がいる。ただってわけにはいかない
せんちょう	船長	n	ship's captain, skipper,length of a ship,boatman	It's 100 gil to Junon. Give it to me, and I'll put in a good word with the captain.	ジュノンまで１００ギル。そんだけもらえれば船長に口聞いてあげてもいいぜ
かいてき	快適	adj-na, n	pleasant, agreeable, comfortable	It's not the most pleasant ride but make the best of it.	快適な船旅とはいえないだろけどがまんしてくれよな
ひとしきり	一頻り	adv, adj-no	for a while, for some time, for a period	Ever since Rufus complimented him, he strutted around for awhile, and haven't heard a peep from him since…	ルーファウスさんにほめられて以来ひとしきり走り回って来ましたがなんの音さたもなし……
はしりまわる	走り回る	v5r, vi	to run around	Ever since Rufus complimented him, he strutted around for awhile, and haven't heard a peep from him since…	ルーファウスさんにほめられて以来ひとしきり走り回って来ましたがなんの音さたもなし……
とびまわる	飛び回る	v5r, vi	to fly about, to skip about, to bustle about	Hey, who're you? You look like you've been around the world twice.	あれ、君たち？世界を飛びまわってるって顔してるね。なんだか知らないけど、がんばってくれよ
かえって	却って	adv	on the contrary, rather, all the more, instead	I don't know what your story is, but hang in there.	メテオだなんだと、みなさん大あわてで最後のヴァカンスをとりにやってくるもんだからボクら、かえっていそがしいですよ
ぶっし	物資	n	goods, materials, commodities, resources, supplies	There's no ship to Junon. Recently, there's been a hoard on materials. Everything's topsy-turvy.	ジュノン行きはでてないんだ。最近、物資の買い占めが多くてもうてんてこまいさ
かいしめ	買い占め	n	buying up of goods, cornering (market)	There's no ship to Junon. Recently, there's been a hoard on materials. Everything's topsy-turvy.	ジュノン行きはでてないんだ。最近、物資の買い占めが多くてもうてんてこまいさ
てんてこまい	天手古舞	n, vs	whirl of busyness, humming with activity, bustling activity	There's no ship to Junon. Recently, there's been a hoard on materials. Everything's topsy-turvy.	ジュノン行きはでてないんだ。最近、物資の買い占めが多くてもうてんてこまいさ
わずか	僅か	adj-na, adv, n	only, merely, (a) little, small quantity	Not gonna be able to nap like this for much longer.	こうしておひるねしていられるのもあとわずかな時間なのね
きらく	気楽	adj-na, n	carefree, comfortable, at ease,easygoing, happy-go-lucky	Well, I'm not worried. When it all comes down, I'm heading for the skies.	ま、俺は気楽なもんだよ。いざとなれば空に逃げちゃうからねえ
べっそう	別荘	n	holiday house, vacation home, villa,prison, jail	House for Sale	売り家（旧神羅べっそう）
ひきとめる	引き止める	v1, vt	to detain, to check, to restrain	Yes, you're right. I'm sorry, please continue.	まあ、そうでしょう。ひきとめはしませんよ
ひやかす	冷やかす	v5s, vt	to banter, to make fun of, to jeer at,to cool, to refrigerate,to window-shop, to look at without buying	That's pretty low. Are you pulling my leg?	いやですねえ。やっぱりひやかしですか？
おうち	お家	n	your home, your family, their home, their family,(my) home	I'm talking about this house. This villa used to belong to President Shinra. It only recently came back on the market.	このお家ですよ。お家。もとプレジデント神羅所有のべっそう。最近、売りにでましてねえ
しょゆう	所有	n, vs	one's possessions, ownership	I'm talking about this house. This villa used to belong to President Shinra. It only recently came back on the market.	このお家ですよ。お家。もとプレジデント神羅所有のべっそう。最近、売りにでましてねえ
しきち	敷地	n	site, plot, lot, grounds	It has a large lot, comes fully furnished with this goose-down bed, and there's even a basement to boot.	広い敷地にごうか家具＆ふかふかベッド。おまけに地下室までついちゃう
かぐ	家具	n	furniture	It has a large lot, comes fully furnished with this goose-down bed, and there's even a basement to boot.	広い敷地にごうか家具＆ふかふかベッド。おまけに地下室までついちゃう
ボー		n	bow,baud	Wha? How do you plan to buy it without a dime on you?	おろっ？買う気ある、ビンボー人のくせに？
しゃかい	社会	n	society, public, community, the world,social studies	Well, the price, for your information, is a steal at 300,000 gil.	ま、社会勉強のため値段だけは教えときましょはい、ポッキリ３０万ギルね。
きなが	気長	adj-na, n	patient, leisurely	Well, let's wait for the captain.	ま、気長にまつことにしますよ
たずねる	訪ねる	v1, vt	to visit, to call on, to pay a visit to	'Praise the Lord,' it's a miracle!! Who'd ever think someone with some real money would ever come here?	ん～　きせきだ！！まさか、ほんとにお金をもってるお客がたずねてくるとは……
しはらう	支払う	v5u, vt	to pay	Yep, 300,000 gil	３０万ギル支払う
こす	越す	v5s	to cross over (e.g. mountain), to go across,to go over (e.g. with audience),to pass time (e.g. a winter),to surpass, to be better than, to exceed,to move house,to go, to come	Geez my lower back's killing me!	ん～こしがいたい～
ゆびわ	指輪	n	(finger) ring	Received "Fire Ring"!	『炎の指輪』を手にいれた！
ぜいたく	贅沢	adj-na	luxury, extravagance,to live in luxury, to indulge oneself,lavish (use of something), abundant, copious, wasteful	Isn't that good? You're just expecting too much.	あら、いいじゃない。そりゃあ、ぜいたくってもんよ
マニュアル		n	manual	Wait a minute. I'm going to look at my guidebook.	ちょっと、まってね。いま、マニュアル見るから
ゆうすう	有数	adj-na, n, adj-no, n-suf	prominent, leading, foremost, distinguished	It says, Costa del Sol is the gateway to the West, and is a prominent world renown resort, which has been around for ages.	ここ、コスタ・デル・ソルは西の大陸のげんかんとしてまた、世界有数のリゾート地として古くから発展してきました……
ふるく	古く	adv, n	anciently, formerly	It says, Costa del Sol is the gateway to the West, and is a prominent world renown resort, which has been around for ages.	ここ、コスタ・デル・ソルは西の大陸のげんかんとしてまた、世界有数のリゾート地として古くから発展してきました……
はってん	発展	n, vs	development, growth, expansion, extension, flourishing,development (of a situation, story, etc.), advancement, progression, unfolding,playing around, having an active sex life	It says, Costa del Sol is the gateway to the West, and is a prominent world renown resort, which has been around for ages.	ここ、コスタ・デル・ソルは西の大陸のげんかんとしてまた、世界有数のリゾート地として古くから発展してきました……
かねもち	金持ち	n	rich person	You wouldn't happen to be…rich?	あなたたち、もしかしてお金持ち？
みなり	身なり	n	dress, attire, clothing, getup, outfit, personal appearance	You're kidding! You can't tell just by looking.	うそ～！身なりを見れば、わかっちゃうわよ
リッチ		adj-na	rich, wealthy, affluent,rich (flavour)	After relaxing at Costa del Sol, stop by the Gold Saucer. It's a rich and exciting place to play!	コスタ・デル・ソルで休んだ後はゴールドソーサーへぬけるのがリッチでメジャーな観光コースなの
メジャー		n	major, large, important, famous,Major (oil companies),measure, tape measure,major league,major (key, scale, etc.)	After relaxing at Costa del Sol, stop by the Gold Saucer. It's a rich and exciting place to play!	コスタ・デル・ソルで休んだ後はゴールドソーサーへぬけるのがリッチでメジャーな観光コースなの
カジノ		n	casino	Head south to the Gold Saucer, and you'll find casinos and an amusement park.	ここから、ずっ～と南のゴールドソーサーにはカジノや遊園地があるのよ
ゆうえん	遊園	n	playground (for children), park	Head south to the Gold Saucer, and you'll find casinos and an amusement park.	ここから、ずっ～と南のゴールドソーサーにはカジノや遊園地があるのよ
たに	谷	n	valley	But if you're planning to walk, you'll have to cross mountains and valleys. I wouldn't recommend it.	でもね～　歩いていくのは山こえ谷こえ、そりゃもうたいへんらしいの
かみそり	剃刀	n	razor	But if you're planning to walk, you'll have to cross mountains and valleys. I wouldn't recommend it.	でもね～　歩いていくのは山こえ谷こえ、そりゃもうたいへんらしいの
るる	縷縷	adj-t, adv-to	continuously, unbroken, at great length, in minute detail	Grrr…	ガルルル……
だき	惰気	n	indolence, listlessness	Not yet. Remember, no compromises.	だめ、だきょうしちゃいけない
りょひ	旅費	n	travel expenses	You're right. After all, this trip was expensive.	そうね。旅費だって高かったんだし
とんずら		n, vs	fleeing, escape	She ran off with our money and Materia.	店の売り上げと商品のマテリアもってとんずらしちゃいましたよ
はだし	裸足	n-suf	barefoot,superior to (a professional, etc. in ability or achievement)	It hurts when you kick me with your bare feet!	はだしでけるのいた～い！
きゅうぎょう	休業	n, vs	closed (e.g. store), business suspended, shutdown, holiday	I don't feel like sightseeing around town. What I really want to do is have fun…  …too bad Gold Saucer is temporarily closed.	もう観光案内どころじゃないのよ。……ほんとはね。ゴールドソーサーも休業続きらしいし
セール		n	sale	Wanna buy a souvenir to remember participating in the Meteor tour?	もうだしおしみなし！世界の終わり大セールだよん！！
ツアー		n	tour	Oh wow!! Man, that's huge!!	メテオかんしょうツアー参加しるしの入ったアイテムはいかが？
つる	吊る	v5r, vi	to hang, to suspend, to sling, to wear (e.g. a sword), to put up (e.g. a shelf),to hang oneself,to hoist an opponent off of his feet by his loincloth,to turn upwards (as if being pulled), to be slanted (of eyes),to pucker (e.g. of a seam), to be pulled tight	Come on…please. If you don't buy from me… I won't be able to pay the rent.	（つったさかなが１匹２匹…これで、４匹め。まあまあね）
サーフィン		n, vs	surfing	I'm sick of surfing.	やっぱ、今年はスノボかな。もうサーフィンはあきちゃったよ
トロピカル		n	tropical,tropical worsted fabric	Welcome to Bar del Sol! Here's to tropical nights!	バールデルソルへようこそ！トロピカルな夜にかんぱい！
かんぱい	乾杯	int	toast, drink (in celebration or in honor of something),drinking one's glass dry,cheers	Welcome to Bar del Sol! Here's to tropical nights!	バールデルソルへようこそ！トロピカルな夜にかんぱい！
みずぎ	水着	n	bathing suit, swimsuit, swimmers	But the only clothes we have are these swim trunks.	なんてたって、水着しか着る服もってないんだから
あたりまえ	当たり前	adj-na, n, adj-no	natural, reasonable, obvious,usual, common, ordinary, commonplace, the norm	I guess I took it for granted because it's so close, and I was so used to seeing it all the time.	そこにあるのがあたりまえみたいになるとわからなくなることってあるよな
まいもどる	舞い戻る	v5r, vi	to come back	That's why I came back here.	ま、そんなわけでまいもどってきたわけよ
えたい	得体	n	nature, character	I wan' learn how speak beddah.	おキャクさん、ワタシ、コトバできるよにもっとおボえたい
こま	独楽	n	spinning top	But don' wan' have stars fall down. You think…same?	ホシ、ふってくるのこまル。おキャクさんも、そだな、ウン！
かんがえかた	考え方	n	way of thinking	My boss is a total arrogant ass!	ボクチンは先輩の考え方がわからない！
さけぶ	叫ぶ	v5b, vi	to shout, to cry, to scream, to shriek, to yell, to exclaim,to clamor (for or against), to clamour (for or against)	I'm gonna tell him off! I'm gonna scream my head off!	ボクチンはさけぶぞ！みにくいくらいのたうちまわるぞ！
のたうちまわる	のた打ち回る	v5r, vi	to writhe (in pain)	I'm gonna tell him off! I'm gonna scream my head off!	ボクチンはさけぶぞ！みにくいくらいのたうちまわるぞ！
せんきょ	占拠	n, vs	occupation (e.g. of territory), exclusive possession	Wrong guy? This is bad for us. That guy's taken over the john.	……人ちがいか。こまるんだよね。あの人、トイレ占拠しちまって
しはらい	支払い	n	payment	And he hasn't even paid his hotel bill yet.	宿代の支払いもまだだし
うなる	唸る	v5r, vi	to groan, to moan,to roar, to howl, to growl,to hum (engine, wind, etc.), to buzz, to whiz, to sough, [object Object],to ooh and aah (in admiration),to sing in a strong, low voice (esp. traditional chant or recitation),to be about to burst, to overflow	He's been in there moaning ever since.	それっきりずっ～と、うなってるんだ
つくえ	机	n	desk	Come now, we know he's a friend of yours…(fibber)	やだなあ、やっぱり知り合いじゃないの…うそつき
おしいる	押し入る	v5r, vi	to push in, to force into, to break in (e.g. into a house), to intrude	Shucks!!  Too bad!	チェッ！！　おしいっ！
ちほう	地方	n, adj-no	district, region, area, locality,the country, countryside, the provinces, rural area	The weather for Costa del Sol tomorrow is going to be…sunny, again.	コスタデルソル地方の明日の天気はいつもの通り、晴れとなっております
どうちゅう	道中	n, n-adv	journey, trip, travels,during the journey, on the way, while travelling	Good morning. Be careful traveling.	おはようございます。道中お気をつけて
さきだつ	先立つ	v5t, vi	to lead, to take the lead (in doing something),to precede, to go before, to take precedence,to die before (esp. one's spouse, parents, etc.),to be a prerequisite	Your party has departed.	お連れのみなさんは先立たれましたよ
えんぎ	縁起	n	omen, sign of luck,origin, history, causation,dependent arising, [object Object]	That's bad luck…	これは縁起でもないことを…
ひとあし	一足	n	a step,short distance, short time	I mean, they have already left.	正しくは…一足先に出発しましたという意味です
まり	鞠	n	ball (for sport, games, etc.),kemari, type of football played by courtiers in ancient Japan	Marlene! You OK?	マリ～ン！元気かぁ…？
せっぱつまる	切羽詰まる	v5r, vi	to be at one's wits' end, to be cornered, [object Object]	Stop looking like a hunted animal! Whatever happens…happens.	せっぱつまった顔なんてやめ！なるようにしかなりません
しんきょ	新居	n	new home	Johnny's New Home	ジョニーの新居
もてもて	持て持て	adj-na	sexy, popular, well-liked	We were in SOLDIER, and childhood friends before that. You were such a playboy.	元ソルジャーかつ幼なじみでモテモテの遊び人
あそびにん	遊び人	n	playboy, libertine, profligate, debauchee,(professional) gambler,person without a steady job, idler, freeloader	We were in SOLDIER, and childhood friends before that. You were such a playboy.	元ソルジャーかつ幼なじみでモテモテの遊び人
ひとごろし	人殺し	n	murder, murderer	And a $#&^ murderer!!	そ、そして……人殺し野郎！！
ぐちる	愚痴る	v5r, vi	to complain, to grumble	A lot of things happened to us. Heh, I better stop my complaining! I sure envy you all living out under the stars.	おたがい、いろいろあったよな。や！　もうぐちるのはやめ！いいよな、あんたたちみたいにの～天気に生きられりゃよ
ハッピー		adj-na	happy	I'm happy like this. So keep out of my life.	俺は、これでもハッピーにやってんだ。俺のラブリーなどうせい生活をじゃましないでくれ！
どうせい	同姓	n, adj-no	same surname	I'm happy like this. So keep out of my life.	俺は、これでもハッピーにやってんだ。俺のラブリーなどうせい生活をじゃましないでくれ！
ふさぎこむ	ふさぎ込む	v5m, vi	to mope, to brood, to be in low spirits, to have the blues	I'm sorry about that. He's had some big shocks and has been depressed lately.	お客さん、ごめんなさいね！彼、ここんとこ、ショックなことがおおくてず～っと、ふさぎこんでるのよ～
いきぬき	息抜き	n, vs	taking a breather, relaxation, vent hole	We haven't seen each other for ages and sometimes it's fun to talk about old times for a change.	ひさしぶりだしたまには息抜きもね
なさけ	情け	n	pity, sympathy, compassion, mercy,affection, love	But I'm such a pitiful waste…	でも、俺みたいな情けねえ野郎じゃね…
どさくさ		adv, vs	confusion, bustle, turmoil, trouble,rushing around, acting frantically	I proposed to her in the middle of all that Meteor stuff!	メテオのどさくさにまぎれて彼女にプロポーズしちゃったよ！
まぎれる	紛れる	v1, vi	to disappear into, to be lost in, to slip into, to get mixed in among,to do something under the cover of (confusion, etc.),to be almost indistinguishable, to be confusingly similar,to be diverted from (negative emotions, etc.), to forget about,to be distracted by, to be too absorbed in	I proposed to her in the middle of all that Meteor stuff!	メテオのどさくさにまぎれて彼女にプロポーズしちゃったよ！
プロポーズ		n, vs	(marriage) proposal	I proposed to her in the middle of all that Meteor stuff!	メテオのどさくさにまぎれて彼女にプロポーズしちゃったよ！
がむしゃら	我武者羅	adj-na, n	reckless, daredevil, frantic	I wanna live my life right now!! I want to build a home and grow old together with her!	俺はいまがむしゃらに生きたい！！彼女といっしょに生きのびて所帯をもつのだ！！
いきのびる	生き延びる	v1, vi	to survive, to live long	I wanna live my life right now!! I want to build a home and grow old together with her!	俺はいまがむしゃらに生きたい！！彼女といっしょに生きのびて所帯をもつのだ！！
せたい	世帯	n	household, home, family, housekeeping	I wanna live my life right now!! I want to build a home and grow old together with her!	俺はいまがむしゃらに生きたい！！彼女といっしょに生きのびて所帯をもつのだ！！
ガメ		n	Gamay (wine grape variety)	Not a bad view…	悪くないながめだな…
たまう	給う	v5u, vt	to do,to give	No, I remember you all now…	いや、まちたまえ。きみはたしか、私の記憶にある……
にっこうよく	日光浴	n, vs	sunbathing	It should be obvious, I'm getting a tan.	見てのとおりだ。日光浴
かせつ	仮説	n, adj-no	hypothesis, supposition, fictional	Nothing. I just remembered a certain hypothesis…	いや、ちょっとした仮説を思いついたのだが……
ぬぐ	脱ぐ	v5g, vt	to take off (clothes, shoes, etc.), to undress	He never takes off his lab coat even in this heat. I guess that's the mark of an intellectual.	この暑さのなか、実験服をぬぐことはない。知的な男のダンディズムよね～
ちてき	知的	adj-na, n	intellectual	He never takes off his lab coat even in this heat. I guess that's the mark of an intellectual.	この暑さのなか、実験服をぬぐことはない。知的な男のダンディズムよね～
せんせい	先生	n	teacher, master, doctor,with names of teachers, etc. as an honorific,previous existence	I'll interpret Professor Hojo's whispers.	宝条先生のボソボソを通訳するね
つうやく	通訳	n, vs	interpretation (i.e. oral translation), interpreter	I'll interpret Professor Hojo's whispers.	宝条先生のボソボソを通訳するね
かいめい	解明	n, vs	clarification, elucidation, explication	It looks like the Professor discovered or found a solution to something.	先生、なにかを発見～解明～したみたいなの
おっかける	追っかける	v1, vt	to chase, to run after, to pursue	I guess we should chase after him. A vacation for two from Mt. Corel to Gold Saucer.	あと、追っかけちゃおうかな。コレル山からゴールドソーサーへふたりのバカンス♥
ぼんぼん	凡々	adj-t, adv-to	ordinary, usual	He used to be the President's little boy. We nicknamed him the little Prez!	彼、昔はプレジデントのボンボンで～。ついたあだなが、プレジデントボンボン！
あだな	あだ名	n, vs	nickname	He used to be the President's little boy. We nicknamed him the little Prez!	彼、昔はプレジデントのボンボンで～。ついたあだなが、プレジデントボンボン！
サー		n	Sir	He didn't look much different than the surfers on the beach.	そこで遊んでるサーファーたちとたいして変わらなかったのよ
ファー		n	fur,far	He didn't look much different than the surfers on the beach.	そこで遊んでるサーファーたちとたいして変わらなかったのよ
そなえる	備える	v1, vt	to furnish with, to equip with, to provide, to install,to prepare for, to make preparations for, to make provision for,to possess (all that is needed), to be endowed with, to be equipped with,to be born with, to have since birth	Be prepared, and you'll never fear.	そなえあればうれいなし。とらぬたぬきのかわざんようってばボクってインテリ！
たぬき	狸	n	tanuki (Nyctereutes procyonoides), raccoon dog,sly dog, sly old fox, sly fox, cunning devil, craftiness, sly person, someone who makes evil plans without ever breaking their poker face	Be prepared, and you'll never fear.	そなえあればうれいなし。とらぬたぬきのかわざんようってばボクってインテリ！
インテリ		n, adj-no	intellectual, egghead,intelligentsia	Be prepared, and you'll never fear.	そなえあればうれいなし。とらぬたぬきのかわざんようってばボクってインテリ！
うらむ	恨む	v5m, vt	to bear a grudge against, to resent, to blame, to curse, to feel bitter towards	Hmm. Man, I'm draggin' today. It's all Shinra's fault.	うらむよなあ、神羅カンパニー！悪者だよな、神羅
わるもの	悪者	n	bad fellow, rascal, ruffian, scoundrel	Hmm. Man, I'm draggin' today. It's all Shinra's fault.	うらむよなあ、神羅カンパニー！悪者だよな、神羅
ひがむ	僻む	v5m	to have a warped view, to be jaundiced, to be prejudiced,to feel that one has been unfairly treated,to be jealous, to be envious, to have an inferiority complex	I really hate Shinra, Inc.! They're all crooked, those Shinra.	へヘ……でも、これってひがみってやつだなあ。さわやかじゃないなあ
さわやか	爽やか	adj-na, n	fresh, refreshing, invigorating,clear (e.g. voice), fluent, eloquent	I really hate Shinra, Inc.! They're all crooked, those Shinra.	へヘ……でも、これってひがみってやつだなあ。さわやかじゃないなあ
なんぱ	軟派	n	seducer, smooth talker, ladies' man, playboy, playgirl,picking up women (on the street),moderate party, moderate,social story (in a newspaper, etc.), society columnist (of a newspaper),bearish trader, bear	Always the same story… Women never pay any attention to me…	ナンパならおことわりよ。まにあってますから
ことわり	断り	n	notice, notification, warning,permission, consent,rejection, refusal, nonacceptance, declination, declining,excuse, plea	Always the same story… Women never pay any attention to me…	ナンパならおことわりよ。まにあってますから
いきかえる	生き返る	v5r, vi	to revive, to come to oneself, to be restored to life	If this is your idea of flirting…forget it. I do fine as it is.	海の風と太陽。自然っていいわね～。いきかえるわ～
オイル		n	oil, engine oil, kerosene	Hey, good timing. Would you mind putting lotion on me?	オイルぬっていただけますか？
ばってん	罰点	n	cross mark, demerit mark, an X	I'm trying to learn how to swim before the end of the world.	世界の終わりまでに上手におよげるようにがんばってんだから～
だんだん	段々	n	gradually, by degrees, little by little, more and more, increasingly,steps, stairs, staircase, terrace	It's getting closer and closer. Someone will do something, don't you think?	だんだん近づいてきてるの。だれか、なんとかしてくれるのよね
ゆるゆる	緩緩	adj-na, adv	very loose, slowly, leisurely	I don't care even if it is the end of the world, I just want to sit here and drink cocktails!	世界の終わりでもおいしいカクテルを飲みながらゆるりゆるゆるとすごしたいわ～！