すれちがう	すれ違う	v5u, vi	to pass by one another,to miss meeting each other, to miss each other,to disagree	I just passed a guy in a black cape back there.	少し前にすれちがった黒マントのヤツがよ
たびびと	旅人	n	traveller, traveler, wayfarer, tourist	If any strangers should greet you warmly while traveling, make sure to greet them back.	旅先で出会った見知らぬ旅人にあったかい声をかけてあいさつをかわす
へんしん	変身	n, vs	metamorphosis, disguise, transformation, shapeshifting, morphing	Received "Transform" Materia!	『へんしん』のマテリアを手にいれた！
れんだ	連打	n, vs	repeated blows, striking repeatedly, barrage,consecutive hits (e.g. boxing, baseball)	Get the treasure by holding the Left or Right Directional buttons down while repeatedly pressing [OK]!	【方向キーの左】か【方向キーの右】を押しながら【○ボタン連打】で空をおよげば、お宝ゲット！
とりなおす	取り直す	v5s, vt	to re-grip, to re-wrestle,to regroup (after some adverse event)	Come on, CLOUD, don't let it get to you. Let's see…this is it.	さっ、気を取り直して…。んっ、これかな
しばし	暫し	adv, adj-no	for a short while, for a brief period, soon, in a short while	Perhaps it's best if we rest a moment.	しばし休息というわけだ
きゅうそく	休息	n, vs, adj-no	rest, relief, relaxation	Perhaps it's best if we rest a moment.	しばし休息というわけだ
まじ		aux-v	serious, not joking, straight,cannot, should not, will not, must not	You kiddin'?	ええ、まじぃ？
もてなし	持て成し	n, vs	hospitality, reception, treatment, service, entertainment	Look, I'm sorry but, I can't do a thing for you!	わるいけどよなんももてなしはできねえぞ！
たんこう	炭鉱	n	coal mine, coal pit	Oh boy!! Corel sure has gone to pot. It used to be a famous coal mining town!	あーあ！！コレルっていやよう昔は炭坑が有名でよう！
てんとう	店頭	adj-no	shopfront, storefront, shopwindow, (near the) shop entrance,over-the-counter	Got no job…I can't even show my face. Bout all that's left for me is just livin' in this hole all day.	仕事がねえんじゃおてんとうさんに顔見せできねえ。こうして穴ぐらぐらしってわけよ
あなぐら	穴蔵	n	cellar, cave, hole in the ground	Got no job…I can't even show my face. Bout all that's left for me is just livin' in this hole all day.	仕事がねえんじゃおてんとうさんに顔見せできねえ。こうして穴ぐらぐらしってわけよ
グラッシ		n	glacis	Got no job…I can't even show my face. Bout all that's left for me is just livin' in this hole all day.	仕事がねえんじゃおてんとうさんに顔見せできねえ。こうして穴ぐらぐらしってわけよ
くやむ	悔やむ	v5m, vt	to mourn, to lament,to be sorry, to regret, to repent	Can't keep regrettin' the past… It's the future we gotta think about now.	すんだことをくやんでもしかたねぇよ……これからどうするかだ
いしころ	石ころ	n	stone, rock, pebble	I'll never understand the rich. I heard some guy named Dio at the Gold Saucer is collectin' rocks!	金持ちってのは、わからねぇもんだな。なんでもゴールドソーサーにいるディオってやつは石ころまで集めてるらしいぜ
うつむく	俯く	v5k, vi	to hang one's head, to look down, to cast one's eyes downward	Look down… nuthin' but junk. Look up…Meteor.	うつむけばガラクタ見上げればメテオ……
みあげる	見上げる	v1, vt	to look up at, to raise one's eyes,to look up to, to admire, to respect	Look down… nuthin' but junk. Look up…Meteor.	うつむけばガラクタ見上げればメテオ……
ロープ		n	rope	And it's only a Ropeway ride away… but I don't have enough money to play…	ロープウェイに乗るだけで行けるのに金がねぇから遊べねぇんだよ…
ウェー		n	way	And it's only a Ropeway ride away… but I don't have enough money to play…	ロープウェイに乗るだけで行けるのに金がねぇから遊べねぇんだよ…
しにがみ	死神	n	god of death, Death	Well, I feel sorry for 'em! Hangin' around a walkin' death sentence like BARRET.	フン、気のどくに！なにせ、BARRETという死神にとりつかれているんだからな
あさり	漁り	n	searching, rummaging,fishing, collecting shells	The only way we can make ends meet around here now is by collecting junk!	この地に残された者はガラクタあさりでしか食っていけねぇんだ！
つらさ	辛さ	n	pain, bitterness	You got a lot of nerve comin' back here!	どのツラさげて、もどってきたんだ？
げ	気	suf	seeming, giving the appearance of, giving one the feeling of	You got a lot of nerve comin' back here!	どのツラさげて、もどってきたんだ？
がれき	瓦礫	n	rubble, debris, wreckage	Look at this place! It's all your fault North Corel turned into a garbage heap!	見てみろ！おまえのせいで北コレルはガレキの町になっちまった……
たまに	偶に	adv, suf	occasionally, once in a while	Whenever I look up in the sky, I see Meteor staring me right in the face…	たまに空を見上げるとメテオのやろうが、でっかい顔してオレを見つめてやがる……
みつめる	見つめる	v1, vt	to stare at, to gaze at, to look hard at, to watch intently, to fix one's eyes on	Whenever I look up in the sky, I see Meteor staring me right in the face…	たまに空を見上げるとメテオのやろうが、でっかい顔してオレを見つめてやがる……
ストーン		n	stone,bijou, trinket, gemstone,stone (unit of weight: 14lb),curling stone, curling rock	A buncha guys called Turks came here sayin' they'd pay 10000 gil for some rock called a 'Keystone'.	タークスとかなんとかいうヤツらが来てキー・ストーンっていう石を１００００ギルで買うって言ったんだ
きしょう	気象	n	weather, climate,disposition, temperament	When I asked how much they'd pay for a regular rock just layin' around here, they slapped me upside my damn head!!	じゃあ、ここに落ちてる石ころならいくらで買ってくれるんだ？って聞いたらなぐられちまったよ、ちきしょう！！
どかどか		adv, adv-to	noisily, with loud footsteps,in a crowd, incessantly, all together	Shinra soldiers came around sayin' they were gathering up all the Huge Materia.	神羅の兵が、どかどかやってきて魔晄炉のヒュージマテリアを回収するだとか言ってたぜ
にらめっこ	睨めっこ	n, vs	staring-out (down) game, game in which two children looking at each other try to make the opponents laugh first,constant looking at something (e.g. the computer screen, the clock, etc.)	Staring up at Meteor won't put food in my stomach.	空を見上げてメテオとにらめっこしても一文のとくにもならねえ
いちもん	一文	n	something insignificant, one mon (10th sen)	Staring up at Meteor won't put food in my stomach.	空を見上げてメテオとにらめっこしても一文のとくにもならねえ
しら	白	n, adj-na	white,unseasoned, undyed, unaltered,very much, precisely,playing dumb,unfeigned, honest, diligent	I wouldn't know	しらない
いきぬく	生き抜く	v5k, vi	to live through, to survive	If you want to survive, then you're gonna need some of my weapons.	生き抜いていくにはこの店の武器が必要だぜ
のりば	乗り場	n	place for boarding vehicles, bus stop, bus terminal, railway platform, taxi stand, jetty, wharf	Take that road on the left to the Ropeway station!	左の道を行けばロープウェイ乗り場があるぜ！
ひかる	光る	v5r, vi	to shine, to glitter, to be bright	Sometimes, I see something glowin' inside the well. If I ever get it, I'm going to sell it and go to the Gold Saucer.	時々イドの中で何かが光るの。ひろったら、お金にかえてゴールドソーサーへ行くんだもん
ポケット		n	pocket	Here, I'll keep it in my pocket, and you can come by later and get it, OK?	ポケットにしまっておくからまた、あとで取りにきてね！
くよくよ		adv, adv-to	to fret (over), to brood (about), to mope, to worry,worriedly, (fretting) constantly, (worrying) over this and that, (obsessing) to no end	No use baggin' on yourself! It's not like you, OLD guy!	くよくよしてもしかたないよ！そんなのオッサンらしくないよ
ことごとく	悉く	adv	altogether, entirely	With us always in their face, even the Shinra's gotta be getting tired of it all.	いくら神羅でも、ことごとくオレ様たちの邪魔が入って、しん重になっているはずだ
ひっこす	引っ越す	v5s, vi	to move (house), to change residence	Maybe we should start fresh, and move to Southern Isle of Mideel?	【南の島ミディール】にでも引っ越して気分をかえてみようかしら
ひかれる	引かれる	v1	to be charmed by, to be attracted to, to be taken with, to be drawn to	What the? Watch out for the train!	なんじゃ？列車にひかれるなよ！
ふせる	伏せる	v5r, vi	to turn over (face down), to lay face down, to lay upside down,to point downwards (eyes, head, etc.), to cast down (eyes),to lie (one's body) face down, to lie flat (on the ground),to conceal, to hide, to keep secret, to place in hiding (e.g. troops for an ambush),to lie down, to retire, to go to bed (with an illness)	Everyone knows that accident couldn't have been avoided.	事故は、ふせぎようがなかったことはみ～んなわかっておるんじゃ
おしつける	押し付ける	v1, vt	to press, to push, to force,to foist on (task, responsibility), to impose (one's will)	But no one will be satisfied until someone takes the blame.	でも、だれかに責任を押しつけなければ気がおさまらんかったのじゃよ
おさまる	収まる	v5r, vi	to fit into (a box, frame, category, etc.), to be contained within, to fall within (e.g. a budget),to settle down (into), to be installed (in one's rightful place), to be returned (to one's original position),to settle into (one's position), to take up (a post), to occupy (a role),to be delivered, to be paid (e.g. taxes),to be settled (dispute, conflict, etc.), to be sorted, to subside (e.g. wind), to calm down, to abate,to be satisfied (e.g. with an answer), to consent, to agree	But no one will be satisfied until someone takes the blame.	でも、だれかに責任を押しつけなければ気がおさまらんかったのじゃよ
かる	刈る	v5r, vt	to cut (grass, hair, etc.), to mow, to clip, to trim, to prune, to shear, to reap, to harvest	But no one will be satisfied until someone takes the blame.	でも、だれかに責任を押しつけなければ気がおさまらんかったのじゃよ
あつめ	集め	n, suf	collecting, assembling	When I grow up, I'm gonna travel the world collecting glowing stones!	大きくなったら世界中の光る石を集めに行くんだ！
くらう	食らう	v5u, vt	to eat, to drink, to wolf, to knock back,to receive (e.g. a blow),to be on the receiving end (of something undesirable), to undergo (trouble)	To hell with the Mako reactor!	魔晄炉なんて、クソくらえじゃ！
ながいき	長生き	n, vs	longevity, long life	I don't want to die, but who can stop Meteor?	もう少し長生きしたかったのにメテオが降ってくるとはな……
こらしめる	懲らしめる	v1, vt	to chastise, to punish, to discipline	Isn't anyone brave enough to stick it to Shinra?	だれか神羅をこらしめてくれる勇気のある者はおらんかの？
は	派	n, n-suf	clique, faction, school	Shinra blamed the accident on the people. Said it was done by a rebel faction.	神羅はその事故の責任をコレル村のオレたちに押しつけた。反対派のしわざだと言ってな
さんせい	賛成	n, vs, adj-no	approval, agreement, support, favour, favor	Never should've gone along with the building of the reactor…	オレさえ魔晄炉に賛成しなければ……
にょうぼう	女房	n	wife (esp. one's own wife),court lady, female court attache, woman who served at the imperial palace,woman (esp. as a love interest)	Not only did they take advantage of me… But I lost my wife, Myrna, too…	あまい言葉にのせられたあげく女房を……ミーナを失い……
ダイン		n	dyne	Dyne was my best friend. We were close ever since we were kids…	ダインは親友だったぜ。ガキのころからのよう……
ふこう	不幸	n	unhappiness, sorrow, misfortune, disaster, accident,death (usu. of a relative), bereavement	Everything Shinra does seems to make everyone miserable…	神羅のやることはみんな不幸にしてしまうのね…
どうじょう	同情	n, vs	sympathy, compassion, feeling pity for	I'm not sympathizing with BARRET! He never should have trusted Shinra, Inc.	アタシはBARRETに同情なんてしないよ！神羅を信じたのが悪いのさ
ぽ	葡	n, n-pref, n-suf	Portugal	The Gold Saucer reopened. Why don't you go play hard and clear your heads as well as your pockets?	ゴールドソーサーが再開したよ。こんな時だからこそ、遊んで頭もサイフもカラッポにしたらどうだい？
ありがね	有り金	n	money on hand	I'm gonna use all my life savings before Meteor hits!	メテオが落ちる前にゴールドソーサーで有り金を全部使ってやるぜ！
ほこる	誇る	v5r, vi	to boast of, to be proud of	It may be dusty and poor,	ほこりっぽくて
のどか	長閑	adj-na	tranquil, calm, quiet, peaceful	but it's calm…	のどかで、まずしくて……
ちっぽけ	小っぽけ	adj-na	very small, tiny	It's a real small town.	そんなちっぽけな村だった。
そんちょう	村長	n	village headman, village mayor	Village Headman	村長
いのちがけ	命がけ	n, adj-no	putting one's life on the line, staking one's life (on), risking one's life, life and death situation	The coal's been ours for generations. Our fathers, and theirs before them, risked their lives for it.	コレルの炭坑は、俺たちのじいさんたち、おやじたちが命がけで守ってきたものだ
せきたん	石炭	n	coal	But listen, Dyne. No one uses coal nowadays. It's the sign of the times.	でもよ、ダイン。今の時代、石炭なんて誰も使わない。時代にはさからえないんだ
あかつき	暁	n	dawn, daybreak,event (e.g. "in the event of ..."), occasion, occurrence	It'll be all right, Dyne. Shinra, Inc. will guarantee your livelihood once the Mako Reactor is completed.	だいじょうぶですよ、ダインさん。魔晄炉完成のあかつきには我々神羅カンパニーがみなさんの生活を保障します
できごと	出来事	n	incident, affair, happening, event	It happened when Dyne and I were out of town for a few days.	オレとダインが村を離れているほんのわずかな時間の出来事だった。
やきはらう	焼き払う	v5u, vt	to burn down (to the ground), to clear away by burning, to reduce to ashes, to burn off	Corel was burned down by the Shinra troops.	コレル村は神羅の軍によってやきはらわれてしまったんだ。
むらびと	村人	n	villager	All the townspeople…	大勢の村人たちも……