にゅうえん	入園	n, vs	enrollment in kindergarten, enrolment in kindergarten,entering a park, garden, zoo, etc.	Are you together? A single pass is 3000 gil, or you can purchase a lifetime pass for 30000 gil.	団体様ですね？　入園チケットは１回３０００ギルです何回でも入園できるゴールドチケットは３００００ギルになります
なくす	無くす	v5s, vt	to lose (something), to mislay,to get rid of, to eliminate, to remove	If you have a Gold Ticket, you can come and go freely into the park…as long as you don't lose it.	ゴールドチケットはお客様がお無くしならない限り何度でも入園できます
たすう	多数	n	large number, many,majority	Here at the Gold Saucer, there are many places where you must pay with GP.	ここゴールドソーサーでは料金を『ＧＰ』でお支払いただくものが多数あります
かくしゅ	各種	n, adj-no	every kind, all sorts	GP can only be redeemed at the games in Wonder Square and at the Chocobo Races.	ＧＰはワンダースクェアの各種ゲームとチョコボレース場でのみお求めいただけます
かんきん	換金	n, vs	realization (of goods into money), conversion (into money), liquidation	Would you like to change gil into GP? 1 GP is 100 gil.	ギルをＧＰに換金しますか？１ＧＰは１００ギルです
えいぎょう	営業	n	business, trade, operations,sales	I'm sorry, I'm gonna close this for awhile.	すまないが、しばらくは営業をひかえさせてもらう
けいえい	経営	n, vs	management, administration, operation, running (business), conducting	I'm just debating if I should be in business at a time like this.	こんな時でも、経営を続けるかどうかを考えている所だ
いた	板	n	board, plank,sheet (of metal), plate (of glass), pane, slab,cutting board, chopping board,chef (esp. of high-end Japanese cuisine), cook,stage (i.e. at a theatre)	Info Board	案内板
えんげき	演劇	n, adj-no	drama, theatre, theater, play	An entertaining show awaits you.	楽しい演劇があなたを待っています
バーチャル		adj-na, n	virtual	Chocobo Racing takes you into the world of Virtual Reality!	チョコボレーシングが君をバーチャル空間へご案内
ひっさつ	必殺	n, adj-no	bringing certain death, deadly, knockout (blow)	Try your hand at the special Gold Attack!!	いま必殺のゴールドアタック！！
アタック		n, vs	attack, assault,attempt, try	Try your hand at the special Gold Attack!!	いま必殺のゴールドアタック！！
えんない	園内	n	inside the garden (park)	Take a tour of the Park and see the beautiful night scenery of Gold Saucer…	園内を一望できます 美しいゴールドソーサーの 夜景をあなたに……
いちぼう	一望	n, vs	one sweep (of the eye), sweeping view, unbroken view	Take a tour of the Park and see the beautiful night scenery of Gold Saucer…	園内を一望できます 美しいゴールドソーサーの 夜景をあなたに……
やけい	夜景	n	night view, night skyline, nightscape	Take a tour of the Park and see the beautiful night scenery of Gold Saucer…	園内を一望できます 美しいゴールドソーサーの 夜景をあなたに……
シューティング		n	shooting	A Shooting Roller Coaster is waiting to take you into the world of excitement.	あなたを興奮の中へ シューティングコースターが 君を待つ！
コースター		n	roller coaster,coaster (small mat for drinks),coaster brake	A Shooting Roller Coaster is waiting to take you into the world of excitement.	あなたを興奮の中へ シューティングコースターが 君を待つ！
げんざいち	現在地	n	present location, current location, "you are here" (on map)	Now in: Gold Gate	『現在地・ゴールドゲート』
さまざま	様々	adj-na, n	varied, various	Let's try all of the Attractions! 	様々なアトラクションへレッツ　アクセス！
アトラクション		n	attraction	Let's try all of the Attractions! 	様々なアトラクションへレッツ　アクセス！
かんどう	感動	n, vs	being deeply moved emotionally, excitement, passion, inspiration, deep emotion, strong impression	You will be moved and excited, thrilled and terrified! Led from one zone to another… unlike anything you've ever experienced! Make your memories…today.	感動と興奮、スリル＆サスペンスあなたを未体験ゾーンへご案内！一生の思い出をあなたに……
サスペンス		n	suspense	You will be moved and excited, thrilled and terrified! Led from one zone to another… unlike anything you've ever experienced! Make your memories…today.	感動と興奮、スリル＆サスペンスあなたを未体験ゾーンへご案内！一生の思い出をあなたに……
たいけん	体験	n, vs	personal experience, physical experience, one's own experience	You will be moved and excited, thrilled and terrified! Led from one zone to another… unlike anything you've ever experienced! Make your memories…today.	感動と興奮、スリル＆サスペンスあなたを未体験ゾーンへご案内！一生の思い出をあなたに……
ゾーン		n	zone	You will be moved and excited, thrilled and terrified! Led from one zone to another… unlike anything you've ever experienced! Make your memories…today.	感動と興奮、スリル＆サスペンスあなたを未体験ゾーンへご案内！一生の思い出をあなたに……
チャラチャラ		adv-to, vs, n	jingle, jangle, clinking, jingling, jangling,chatty, nattering, chattering away, yatter, joking around, messing around,coquettish, tawdry, flirty, flashy, flighty, jittery, superficial	So PLAY! …mess around all you want!	勝手にしろ！チャラチャラしやがってよ！
まことに	誠に	adv	indeed, really, absolutely, truly, actually, very, quite	Um, I'm very sorry, but you do not have enough GP.	あの、まことにもうしわけございませんがＧＰがたりませんようです
けしき	景色	n, adj-no	scenery, scene, landscape	You will be able to see all of Gold Saucer park on this ride. So please just sit back and enjoy a lovely view you won't see anywhere else.	こちらの乗り物は中からゴールドソーサーの色々な景色がお楽しみいただけます。ただ、すわっているだけでは見ることの出来ない景色も多くございますのでマドからのぞいてみるとよろしいですよ
せんよう	専用	n, pref, suf, adj-no	exclusive use, personal use, dedicated,private (e.g. network)	This attraction can only accommodate 2 passengers, so one of you please wait over there.	それとこちら、お２人様専用のアトラクションになってございますのでお１人様はこちらでおまちください
いっぷう	一風	n, n-adv	oddity, eccentricity, peculiarity	We put on a really unusual show here. But not today, so come back again sometime and see it.	ここは、一風変わったショーをするんだ今日はやってないみたいだけどまた、きてみるといいよ
けいひん	景品	n	gift, premium, freebie, giveaway, something additional, an extra,prize (lottery drawing, pachinko, etc.),party favor (favour)	Hey, since the prizes changed, I got 5000 points again.	へへへ、景品が変わったんでまた５０００点を取ったぜ
みてい	未定	adj-no, adj-na, n	not yet fixed, undecided, pending	Hey, I finally got 'Undecided 4'.	へへへ、ついに【未定４】を手に入れたぜ
つける	付ける	v1, vt	to attach, to join, to add, to append, to affix, to stick, to glue, to fasten, to sew on, to apply (ointment),to furnish (a house with),to wear, to put on,to keep a diary, to make an entry,to appraise, to set (a price),to allot, to budget, to assign,to bring alongside,to place (under guard or doctor),to follow, to shadow,to load, to give (courage to),to keep (an eye on),to establish (relations or understanding),to turn on (light),to produce flowers, to produce fruit	We have to be careful of these steps.	こういう階段って気を付けないとね
クラクラ		adv, adv-to, vs	dizzy, giddy	I'm dizzy!!	クラクラ～！！
しょうねん	少年	n	boy, juvenile, young boy, youth, lad	Hey boy.	そこの少年
えんちょう	園長	n	head of a garden, kindergarten principal, nursery school principal, park director (botanical garden), zoo director (zoological garden), head of a plantation	Mmm? Me? I'm the owner of the Gold Saucer. The name's Dio.	ん？　私か？私は、ここゴールドソーサーの園長ディオという
きがる	気軽	n	carefree, buoyant, lighthearted, sprightly,ease	Just call me 'Dio'.	気軽に『ディオちゃん』と呼んでくれ
てのこう	手の甲	n	back of the hand	Why yes, yes indeed. And a tattoo on his hand that said '1'.	その通りだ。それに手の甲に『１』のタトゥーをしていたぞ
とうぎ	闘技	n	competition, contest	I say, stop by the Battle Arena if you like, boy.	おお、そうだ少年よ。よかったら、闘技場によってみてくれ
コレクション		n	collection,correction	You'll probably like it. Many of my collections are on display there.	君なら気に入ってくれると思うよ。私のコレクションの数々もかざってあることだし
かずかず	数々	n-adv, adj-no	many, numerous, various, large number of	You'll probably like it. Many of my collections are on display there.	君なら気に入ってくれると思うよ。私のコレクションの数々もかざってあることだし
かざる	飾る	v5r, vt	to decorate, to ornament, to adorn	You'll probably like it. Many of my collections are on display there.	君なら気に入ってくれると思うよ。私のコレクションの数々もかざってあることだし
さる	申	n	ninth sign of the Chinese zodiac (The Monkey, 3pm-5pm, west-southwest, July)	This way, Sir, to register.	お客さまお申しこみはこちらでおねがいします
しこむ	仕込む	v5m, vt	to train, to teach, to educate,to acquire (information), to learn, to cram,to stock, to stock up on,to prepare (esp. ingredients for brewing),to insert, to build into, to fit	This way, Sir, to register.	お客さまお申しこみはこちらでおねがいします
ばん	万	adv, pref	many, all	While your ride's going ZOOM, you're going BANG BANG, and things are going PHEW PHEW and you destroy them with a big BOOM. Pretty simple, isn't it?	ゴーッと走る中にピュンピュンと出てくる物をバンバンと撃ってドッカーンとやっつけるの。どう、簡単でしょ？
バー		n	bar,VAR	Oh, to shoot, hit [OK]. The bar on the left side of the screen is your Power Meter.	あっ撃つのは○ボタンよ。それから～、画面左についてるバーはパワーメーターなの
パワー		n	power	Oh, to shoot, hit [OK]. The bar on the left side of the screen is your Power Meter.	あっ撃つのは○ボタンよ。それから～、画面左についてるバーはパワーメーターなの
メーター		n	meter, gauge,metre (i.e. 100 cm), meter,animator	Oh, to shoot, hit [OK]. The bar on the left side of the screen is your Power Meter.	あっ撃つのは○ボタンよ。それから～、画面左についてるバーはパワーメーターなの
てんすう	点数	n	marks, points, score, grade, runs (baseball),number of items, number of articles	If you make it to the Top 3, you'll get on the Wall of Fame.	あとね、お客さんの点数は上位３つまで出口の人が記録しておいてくれるのがんばってね♥
じょうい	上位	n	superior (in rank), top, ranking,higher order (e.g. byte),host computer (of connected device)	If you make it to the Top 3, you'll get on the Wall of Fame.	あとね、お客さんの点数は上位３つまで出口の人が記録しておいてくれるのがんばってね♥
プラットホーム		n	platform	Platform	プラットホーム
とくてん	得点	n, vs	scoring, score, points made, marks obtained, goals, runs	You had points.	あなたの得点は点でした
スコア		n	score	Would you like to see the Wall of Fame?	あなたのスコア記録を見ますか？
ゴースト		n	ghost	Welcome. Thank you for coming to the Ghost Hotel.	いらっしゃいませ当ゴーストホテルへおいでいただきまことに、ありがとうございます
よやく	予約	n, vs	reservation, appointment, booking, advance order,contract, subscription, pledge,programming (e.g. a device), setting (e.g. a timer)	For reservations, please step up to the counter.	お部屋のご予約は奥のカウンターでどうぞ
にんき	人気	n	popularity, public favor,condition (e.g. market), tone, character, nature	It's our most popular employee, Mr. Hangman.	当ホテルの人気者首つり君でございます
くびつり	首吊り	n, vs	hanging (by the neck)	It's our most popular employee, Mr. Hangman.	当ホテルの人気者首つり君でございます
ぼちぼち		adj-na	little-by-little, gradually, slowly, soon,not bad, passable, so-so	They're going	ボチボチだな
しんがお	新顔	n	newcomer, new face	Mmm? You're new here, aren't you? Then, you want an explanation of the Battle Arena?	ん？　あんた新顔だな？なら、おれ様がこの闘技場のことを教えてやろうか？
もしゃ	模写	n, vs	copy (of the real thing), copying, reproduction, tracing	Well, it's a little late for me to run around now, so I do what I love, it works best for me.	ま、いまさらジタバタしてもしゃ～ないしこうして、スキなことをやってるのが１番だねオレは
さいきょう	最強	adj-no, n	strongest	Oh, by the way, did you know? I heard that there's going to be a battle and only the strongest will be allowed to participate.	そうそう、あんた知ってるかい？ここにはよ、最強と認められたもののみが参加をゆるされるバトルがあるって話だぜ
あいまい	曖昧	adj-na, n	vague, ambiguous, unclear,fuzzy	But what do they mean by 'strongest'? If ya ask me I'll say it's 'weapons.'	しかし、最強ってのもあいまいだよなとりあえず、武器かな。
きめて	決め手	n	decider, person who decides,deciding factor, clincher, trump card, winning move	But, there's gotta be a way to measure this, too. Mmm, we need another way to measure strength.	それと、ここでの強さもコジしねぇとな。う～ん、もう１つぐらい決め手がほしいか
そよぐ	戦ぐ	v5g, vi	to rustle, to sway, to stir, to flutter	You fight here and collect battle points. You can then exchange those points for prizes.	ここは、戦って戦って戦い抜いてバトルポイントをもらいそいつで商品をもらう所さ
フロント		n	front (aspect, weather, war-front, etc.),reception (hotel, etc.), front desk,front office, team management	The Battle Game…even though it's a game you still use all your physical abilities. To participate, go to the front and pay yer GP's.	バトルゲーム…、ゲームといっても体を張ったゲームだがなこれには奥のフロントでＧＰを払って、ゲームに登録すればいい
とうろく	登録	n, vs	registration, accession, register, entry, record	The Battle Game…even though it's a game you still use all your physical abilities. To participate, go to the front and pay yer GP's.	バトルゲーム…、ゲームといっても体を張ったゲームだがなこれには奥のフロントでＧＰを払って、ゲームに登録すればいい
れんぞく	連続	n, vs	continuation, succession, series	You can fight in up to eight battles. The more you win, the more battle points you get.	バトルは８戦まで連続で行うことができる。もちろん勝ち抜けば勝ち抜くほどもらえるバトルポイントは増えていく
かちぬく	勝ち抜く	v5k, vi	to win through	You can fight in up to eight battles. The more you win, the more battle points you get.	バトルは８戦まで連続で行うことができる。もちろん勝ち抜けば勝ち抜くほどもらえるバトルポイントは増えていく
じてん	時点	n	point in time, occasion	But, if you lose, you lose all your points So it's up to you whether or not to fight after each win.	ただし、途中で敗けた場合そのバトルでかせいだポイントは０になる勝った時点で、次のバトルに進むかどうかは、あんたの自由ってわけさ
ハンディ		adj-na	handicap,compact, portable, easy-to-use, handy	They also make it harder by givin' out handicaps.	それと、バトルにはハンデがつくこちらの不利な条件だらけだ
せおう	背負う	v5u, vi	to carry on one's back,to be burdened with, to take responsibility for,to have (something) in the background, to be in front (of something),to be conceited, to think highly of oneself	They decide what handicaps there'll be, and you won't know what you're up against until the battle.	ハンデの内容は向こうがきめるこっちは、何のハンデを背負うかはバトル直前までわからん
ちょくぜん	直前	n-adv, n-t	just before	They decide what handicaps there'll be, and you won't know what you're up against until the battle.	ハンデの内容は向こうがきめるこっちは、何のハンデを背負うかはバトル直前までわからん
すませる	済ませる	v1, vt	to finish, to make an end of, to get through with, to let end	Sir, that entrance is for the challengers who have already registered. Please register here.	お客様、そちらはバトルゲームへ登録をすませた、チャレンジャーが入るところです。登録をこちらですませてください
チャレンジャー		n	challenger	Sir, that entrance is for the challengers who have already registered. Please register here.	お客様、そちらはバトルゲームへ登録をすませた、チャレンジャーが入るところです。登録をこちらですませてください
ぜんかい	前回	n-adv, n-t	previous time, last time, previous installment, previous instalment, previous session	I'm sorry to announce that our prizes have changed. Your previous battle points are no longer valid.	もうしわけございませんが商品が変わりましたので前回までのバトルポイントは無効になりました
けり	蹴り	n	kick	I'll give that Meteor my ultra kick… …or…maybe not.	メテオなんて、アタシのこのケリでガツーン……、というわけにはいかないか？
スタッフ		n, adj-no	staff,stuff	Two staff members and some Shinra soldiers were shot.	神羅兵と一練にここのスタッフまで撃たれたって聞いたわ
そくし	即死	n, vs, adj-no	instant death	The soldiers died instantly, but the staff survived.	けど、撃たれた神羅兵は即死だったらしいけど、スタッフは２人ともケガだけですんだって話よ
れきだい	歴代	n, adj-no	successive generations, successive emperors	Probably strong enough to take on the top 1 or 2 fighters?	たぶん、歴代ファイターでも１、２をあらそう強さだわ
あらす	荒らす	v5s, vt	to lay waste, to devastate, to damage,to invade, to break into,to troll (e.g. web forums), to spam	Probably strong enough to take on the top 1 or 2 fighters?	たぶん、歴代ファイターでも１、２をあらそう強さだわ
ちょうせん	挑戦	n, vs	challenge, defiance, dare, attempt, try	Maybe you'll be good enough for the big match…	あなたなら、あれに挑戦できるかも知れないわね……
りょう	料	n-suf, n	fee, charge, rate,material	Register for battle? The entrance fee is 10 GP.	バトルに登録しますか？登録料は１０ＧＰです
どなた	何方	n	who?	This is a one-on-one battle. Which one of you will participate?	バトルへの参加は１人となっておりますどなたが参加いたしますか？
かくとく	獲得	n, vs, adj-no	acquisition, possession	Gained  Battle Points	バトルポイントをポイント獲得
ごうけい	合計	n, vs	sum total, total amount	Total  BP	合計　　ＢＰ
バル		n	balcony,Spanish bar, Spanish-style restaurant with a counter, serving food, alcoholic drinks, and coffee	All right, I'll show 'em.	よし、ガンバルぞ
かれい	華麗	adj-na	splendid, magnificent, gorgeous	I'll show you my moves!	アタシのカレイな舞をみせてやる！
かけ	掛け	suf	credit,money owed on an account, bill,hot noodles in broth,proportion (of wholesale price, as tenths of list price),in the midst of,rest, rack, hanger	Shrapnel = 320	ボムのかけら　　　　　　３２０
きよせ	季寄せ	n	dictionary of seasonal words (for haiku and haikai)	Enemy lure = 5120	てきよせ　　　　　　　５１２０
チャンピオン		n	champion	Championship Belt = 40960	チャンピオンベルト　４０９６０
ベルト		n	belt (waist, seat, etc.), strap,belt, zone, area,drive belt, machine belt	Championship Belt = 40960	チャンピオンベルト　４０９６０
ばんのう	万能	adj-no, n	all-purpose, utility, universal,all-powerful, almighty, omnipotent, all-round (e.g. athlete)	Remedy = 200	万能薬　　　　　　　　　　２００
はね	羽	n	feather, plume, down,wing,blade (of a fan, propeller, etc.),shuttlecock,arrow feathers	Bird Wing = 1600	巨鳥のハネ　　　　　　　１６００
マイン		n	mine	S-Mine = 3200	Ｓマイン　　　　　　　　３２００
ぶしん	武神	n	god of military arts	Omnislash(Limit 1) = 51200	超究武神覇斬（限定１）５１２００
は	覇	n	supremacy (over a nation), hegemony, domination, leadership,championship, victory	Omnislash(Limit 1) = 51200	超究武神覇斬（限定１）５１２００
げんてい	限定	n, vs, adj-no	limit, restriction	Omnislash(Limit 1) = 51200	超究武神覇斬（限定１）５１２００
しなぎれ	品切れ	n, adj-no	out of stock, sold out	We are currently out of this prize.	『こちらの商品は品切れです』
せんこう	専攻	n, vs, adj-no	major subject, special study	Received "Pre-Emptive" Materia!	『せんせんこうげき』のマテリアを手にいれた！
リボン		n	ribbon	For winning the Special Battle, Received "Ribbon"!	裏バトルを勝った記念に 『リボン』をもらった！
しきし	色紙	n	square fancy cardboard, used for autographs, poetry, etc.	For winning the Special Battle, Received "Autograph"!	裏バトルを勝った記念に 『サイン色紙』をもらった！
げきとう	激闘	n, vs	fierce fighting	For winning the Special Battle, Received "Combat Diary"!	裏バトルを勝った記念に 『ディオ激闘日記』をもらった！
にっき	日記	n	diary, journal	For winning the Special Battle, Received "Combat Diary"!	裏バトルを勝った記念に 『ディオ激闘日記』をもらった！
ファイナル		n	final	For winning the Special Battle, Received "Final Attack" Materia!	裏バトルを勝った記念に 『ファイナルアタック』 のマテリアを手にいれた！！
しぼる	絞る	v5r, vt	to wring (towel, rag), to squeeze,to squeeze (fruit to extract juice), to press, to extract, to milk, to express milk,to rack (one's brains), to strain (one's voice),to extort, to exploit,to chew out, to reprimand severely, to rake over the coals, to give a sound scolding, to tell someone off, to scold, to rebuke,to drill into, to train,to narrow down (one's focus), to whittle down,to gather up (curtain, etc.), to tighten (drawstring),to stop down (lens),to turn down (e.g. radio),to bend (bow), to draw,to hold down, to constrict, to immobilize	You can only buy up to 3 tickets Think before you buy. For example, you could select half of the Chocobos and buy 3 boxes.	チョコボ券は３点までしか買えないよ～く、考えて買うんだな例えば、チョコボを半分にしぼって３点をボックスで買うとかな
ボックス		n	box	You can only buy up to 3 tickets Think before you buy. For example, you could select half of the Chocobos and buy 3 boxes.	チョコボ券は３点までしか買えないよ～く、考えて買うんだな例えば、チョコボを半分にしぼって３点をボックスで買うとかな
かいかた	買い方	n	buyer, purchaser,method of buying	No matter how you make your bet, you win some and you lose some. It all comes down to skill and luck.	まぁ、どんな買い方しても当たる時は当たるし、外れる時は外れるけっきょく最後は自分のカンがもの言うってわけかな
はずれる	外れる	v1, vi	to be disconnected, to get out of place, to be off, to be out (e.g. of gear)	No matter how you make your bet, you win some and you lose some. It all comes down to skill and luck.	まぁ、どんな買い方しても当たる時は当たるし、外れる時は外れるけっきょく最後は自分のカンがもの言うってわけかな
オッズ		n	chances of winning (a bet), odds	Hey, see that Chocobo on the odds sheet?	ねぇ、あのオッズ表のチョコボって何？
きしゅ	騎手	n	horseman, rider, jockey	Well, not as easy as you think. It's not just a matter of the Chocobo's strength, but it also depends on the jockey and the Chocobo's personality.	そうでも、ないんだよ。強さだけじゃなくて乗っている騎手の腕前やチョコボの性格
うでまえ	腕前	n	ability, skill, facility	Well, not as easy as you think. It's not just a matter of the Chocobo's strength, but it also depends on the jockey and the Chocobo's personality.	そうでも、ないんだよ。強さだけじゃなくて乗っている騎手の腕前やチョコボの性格
ゴール		n	goal, basket (basketball), finishing line, winning post,Gaul	If these are bad, the Chocobo may use too much stamina.	これが悪いと、スタミナを使いすぎてゴールまでもたなかったりといろんな要素がからんでくるからね
ようそ	要素	n	component, factor, item (e.g. in list),element (e.g. in array), member (e.g. data structure)	If these are bad, the Chocobo may use too much stamina.	これが悪いと、スタミナを使いすぎてゴールまでもたなかったりといろんな要素がからんでくるからね
からむ	絡む	v5m, vi	to entangle, to entwine,to pick a quarrel, to find fault,to be involved with, to be influenced by, to develop a connection with	If these are bad, the Chocobo may use too much stamina.	これが悪いと、スタミナを使いすぎてゴールまでもたなかったりといろんな要素がからんでくるからね
フリー		adj-na	free (of restraint, controls, etc.),free (of cost),freelance,one-size	You can buy A rank tickets if you become a freelance Chocobo jockey.	フリーのチョコボレーサーになればＡランクレースのチョコボ券を買えるようになるんだよ
コネ		n	connection, pull	You can become one if you own a Chocobo …and have some connections. But Chocobo's are pretty hard to catch and I don't have any connections.	コネと自分のチョコボがあればなれるんだけど…チョコボ捕まえるのは大変だしコネも持ってないからなぁ
てきちゅう	的中	n, vs	striking home, hitting the mark,coming true, proving to be right, becoming realized	If your ticket is a winner, you will receive an item ticket good for items on the panel.	お買いになったチョコボ券が的中した場合はパネルに振り分けられたアイテム券をもらえます
パネル		n	panel	If your ticket is a winner, you will receive an item ticket good for items on the panel.	お買いになったチョコボ券が的中した場合はパネルに振り分けられたアイテム券をもらえます
ふりわける	振り分ける	v1, vt	to divide in two, to divide in half,to apportion, to divide among, to portion out, to allot, to assign	If your ticket is a winner, you will receive an item ticket good for items on the panel.	お買いになったチョコボ券が的中した場合はパネルに振り分けられたアイテム券をもらえます
おうじる	応じる	v1, vi	to respond, to satisfy, to accept, to comply with, to apply for	Your item ticket may be exchanged for an item or GP at the exchange counter to the right of the entrance.	アイテム券は入口右の交換所でアイテムかアイテムに応じたＧＰに変えることが出来ます
かいもとめる	買い求める	v1, vt	to buy	Welcome. Would you like to buy some Chocobo tickets?	いらっしゃいませ。チョコボ券をお買い求めですか？
とうひょう	投票	n, vs, adj-no	voting, poll	Registration fees are 200 gil. Is that all right?	レース投票の登録に２００ギルかかりますがよろしいですか？
ダイナミック		adj-na, n	dynamic	The natural scenery you see in the race doesn't really exist.	実際には存在しない自然の中でダイナミックなレースを展開します
てんかい	展開	n, vs	development, evolution, progressing, unfolding, (plot) twist,expansion, spreading out, extending, deployment, building up,expansion,extraction (e.g. files), decompression, unpacking	The natural scenery you see in the race doesn't really exist.	実際には存在しない自然の中でダイナミックなレースを展開します
たてる	立てる	suf, v1	to stand up, to put up, to set up, to erect, to raise,to thrust into, to bury into, to dig into,to make (a noise), to start (a rumour), to raise (a cloud of dust, etc.), to cause,to make, to establish, to set up, to develop, to formulate,to put up (a political candidate), to make (one's leader),to treat with respect, to give (someone) their due, to make (someone) look good, to avoid embarrassing (someone),to sharpen, to make clear,to shut, to close,to make tea (matcha), to perform the tea ceremony,to divide by,to do ... vigorously	This data is helpful when you make your pick.	こちらを参考にして予想を立てられるとよろしいかと思います
うでどけい	腕時計	n	wristwatch	Received "Precious Watch"!!	『高級腕時計』を手にいれた！！
かど	角	n	corner (e.g. desk, pavement),edge	Received "Bolt Plume"!!	『電撃鳥の角』を手にいれた！！
りゅう	竜	n	dragon (esp. a Chinese dragon),naga, [object Object],promoted rook	Received "Fire Fang"!!	『火龍の牙』を手にいれた！！
きば	牙	n	tusk, fang	Received "Fire Fang"!!	『火龍の牙』を手にいれた！！
なんきょく	南極	n, adj-no	South Pole,the Antarctic, Antarctica	Received "Antarctic Wind"!!	『南極の風』を手にいれた！！
すず	鈴	n	bell (often globular)	Received "Cat's Bell"!!	『タマのすず』を手にいれた！！
うでわ	腕輪	n	bracelet, bangle	Received "Chocobracelet"!!	『チョコボの腕輪』を手にいれた！！
れいき	冷気	n	cold, chill, cold weather, cold wave, cold air	Received "Ice Crystal"!!	『冷気の結晶』を手にいれた！！
けっしょう	結晶	n, vs	crystal, crystallization, crystallisation,fruits (of labor, union, etc.)	Received "Ice Crystal"!!	『冷気の結晶』を手にいれた！！
レーサー		n	racer	It's little lonely around here, but you can't keep a jockey from doing what he loves.	ここも、さびしくなっちゃったけどレーサーたちの燃えるタマシイは止められないわ
ジョー		n, adj-f	joe,jaw	S rank! Joe's usually in that group, too. So good luck.	Ｓ　ランク！ジョーも大抵はここで活躍しているのガンバッテね
ロング		adj-na, n	long	Which do you want, the long course or the short one?	コースはロングとショートがあるけど、どっちにする？
ショート		n	short,shortstop,short (circuit),short hair,short selling	Which do you want, the long course or the short one?	コースはロングとショートがあるけど、どっちにする？
てらう	衒う	v5u, vt	to show off, to parade, to pretend	Good Luck! Take care!	がんばっていってらっしゃ～い
オート		n	auto, automobile, automatic,oat, oats	First use [ASSIST] to choose either AUTO or MANUAL.	まず『ＳＥＬＥＣＴ』ボタンでオートとマニュアルを切り替えるの
スピードダウン		n, vs	slowing down	When you're riding, use [SWITCH] to Speed Up and [CANCEL]to Slow Down.	それから、自分で命令してる時に□ボタンでスピードアップ×ボタンでスピードダウン
しょうひ	消費	n, vs, adj-no	consumption, expenditure	But this makes your stamina run out faster.	もちろんスタミナの消費は激しくなるけどね
きしょう	気性	n	disposition, temperament, temper, nature	Some Chocobos are bad-tempered and can't pace themselves. They'll lose their stamina quickly.	あと、気性の悪いチョコボは自分のペースがわからなくてすぐスタミナを使いきっちゃうの
アーム		n	arm,automated retroactive minimal moderation, ARMM	Arm Wrestling	アームレスリング
レスリング		n	wrestling	Arm Wrestling	アームレスリング
メガ		n, pref	mega-, 10^6	Mega Sumo	メガずもう
たいせん	対戦	n, vs	waging war, competition	Please select opponent.	『対戦レベルを選んでください』
すもう	相撲	n	sumo wrestling,wrestler, rikishi	Sumo Wrestler	すもう
レスラー		n	wrestler	Wrestler	レスラー
バスケット		n	basket,basketball,basket cloth	Basketball Game	『バスケットゲーム』
シュート		n	shooting (a ball), shot (on basket, at goal, etc.),shoot (of a tree or plant),chute,shuuto, shootball, [object Object]	Release [OK] to shoot.	力をため○ボタンをはなすとシュートをうちます
ギブアップ		n, vs	give up	Give Up!	『ギブアップ！』
なかみ	中身	n, adj-no	contents, interior, substance, filling, (sword) blade	We got new prizes. But what's in them is a secret.	新しい商品も入りましたよ中身はナイショですけど
ばら	薔薇	n	rose	I'm gonna let you in on something… Y'see, this is Materia. But you can't seem to carry any more of it.	バラしちゃうけどこれ、マテリアなのよけど、あなたいっぱいで持てないわよ
まくる	捲る	v5r, vt	to turn up, to roll up (e.g. sleeves),to do over and over again, to do relentlessly, to do with reckless abandon,to stage a comeback (against) (in mahjong, horse racing, etc.), to come from behind	I'm just gonna spend all my money and play until I drop!!	もう、こうなったらここで、遊びまくってお金使いきってやるんだから！
バトラー		n	butler	3D Battler	『３Ｄバトラー』
じょうだん	上段	n	upper tier, upper section, upper deck, upper row, upper step, upper grade, upper berth, top shelf,place of honor, place of honour,dais, raised part of floor,overhead position (of a sword in kendo, etc.)	[MENU]       Hi attack	△ボタンで上段攻撃
ちゅうだん	中段	n	half-way up a slope or stairway, landing, center of three (horizontal) columns (of print) (centre)	[SWITCH]   Mid attack	□ボタンで中段攻撃
げだん	下段	n	lower tier, lower step, lower column, lower berth, bottom shelf,low position (of a sword in kendo, etc.)	[CANCEL]   Low attack	×ボタンで下段攻撃
せんしゅ	先取	n, vs	earning the first (runs), preoccupation	The first one with 10 points wins.	１０ポイント先取したほうの勝ちです
ものずき	物好き	n, adj-na	(idle) curiosity, fancifulness, whimsy, (having) strange tastes	You sure are an unusual one. Staying here with all that's going on outside…guess that makes, uh, two of us, huh?	あんたも物好きね外があんなだってのにこんな所に来て…ってアタシもか？
たいじん	対人	adj-no	personal, inter-personal	Use caution in relationships	対人関係に注意
ラッキー		adj-na, n	lucky	Your lucky color is red.	ラッキーカラーは赤です
カラー		n	collar,color, colour,hair colouring (coloring),calla (variety of arum lily)	Your lucky color is red.	ラッキーカラーは赤です
ふち	縁	n	rim, brim, edge, brink	You have ties with those that fly.	空飛ぶ乗物に縁がありそうです
ほうがく	方角	n	direction, way,point of the compass, cardinal direction, bearing,method, means, approach	What you're looking for is in the Southeast	南東の方角に探し物があります
てんき	転機	n	turning point	A great turning point is near.	大きな転機がおとずれます
おとずれる	訪れる	v1, vi	to visit, to call on,to arrive, to come, to appear	A great turning point is near.	大きな転機がおとずれます
げんてん	減点	n, vs	subtract, give a demerit	If the truck is attacked, you lose points.	トラックが攻撃を受けると減点です
かそく	加速	n, vs	acceleration, speeding up	[Directional button Up] to speed up	『方向キー上』で加速
げんそく	減速	n, vs, adj-no	deceleration	[SWITCH] to slow down	□ボタンで減速
エッジ		n	edge	[PAGEDOWN] + Directional button Right/Left] to edge	『Ｒ１ボタン＋方向キー左右』でそれぞれの方向にエッジをきかせます
バルーン		n	balloon	You receive points for hitting the balloons that appear on the course.	コースにでてくるバルーンを取るとポイントになります。
せんかい	旋回	n, vs	revolution, rotation, turning, circling, swiveling,turning (an aircraft or ship)	Directional button Left for Left Turn	『方向キー左』で左に旋回
かこう	下降	n, vs	descent, fall, drop, decline, downturn, subsidence	Directional button Up to Dive	『方向キー上』で下降
じょうしょう	上昇	n, vs, adj-no	rising, ascending, climbing	Directional button Down to Rise	『方向キー下』で上昇
ぜんしん	前進	n, vs	advance, moving forward, progress	[MENU]   to Speed Up	△ボタンで前進
こうたい	後退	n	retreat, falling back, moving backwards, reversing, retrogression, retraction,recession, waning,backspace (key)	[CANCEL] to Slow Down	×ボタンで後退
はっしゃ	発射	n, vs	firing, shooting, discharge, catapult,ejaculation	[SWITCH] to Fire Torpedo	□ボタンでギョライ発射
きらい	機雷	n	(sea) mine	Find and avoid mines by using the Sonar, and destroy the Enemy Submarines.	ソナーで機雷を見つけ、よけながら敵潜水監を全滅させるとクリアです。
ちょうせい	調整	n, vs	adjustment, regulation, coordination, reconciliation, tuning, fixing, tailoring	Out of Order	調整中
セーフティー		n	safety	Received "Safety Bit"!	『セーフティビット』を手にいれた！
ビット		n	bit	Received "Safety Bit"!	『セーフティビット』を手にいれた！
いか	以下	n	not exceeding, and downward, ... and below,below (e.g. standard), under (e.g. a level),the below-mentioned, the following, the rest	Received "Ink"!	『イカスミ』を手にいれた！
すみ	隅	n	corner, nook, recess,downstage right (on a noh stage)	Received "Ink"!	『イカスミ』を手にいれた！
じくう	時空	n, adj-no	space-time	Received "T/S Bomb"!	『時空弾』を手にいれた！
まじょ	魔女	n, adj-no	witch	Received "Caldron"!	『魔女の大釜』を手にいれた！
おおがま	大釜	n	cauldron	Received "Caldron"!	『魔女の大釜』を手にいれた！
もり	森	n	forest,shrine grove	This is Mog's house. It's in Mog Forest on Mt. Mog.	ここはモーグリ山の モーグリ森のモグの家。
みなす	見なす	v5s, vt	to consider as, to regard (as equivalent), to deem (as), to equate	But before Mog can become an adult, he first needs to learn how to fly. 	モーグリの世界では 飛べるようになると りっぱなオスとみなされます。
だいすき	大好き	adj-na	loveable, very likeable, like very much	Help Mog learn how to fly by pushing [OK] and feeding him his favorite Kupo nut.	【○ボタン】で、モグの大好きな クポの実をあげて、彼が飛べるよう 手伝ってあげてください。
ようじん	用心	n, vs	care, precaution, guarding, caution	But don't overfeed him. He won't be able to fly if he's too fat.	でも、あげすぎには御用心。 重くて飛べなくなってしまいます。
ひとりぼっち	一人ぼっち	n, adj-no	aloneness, loneliness, solitude	Oh-oh, seems like you don't have enough Gil. Poor Mog, looks like he'll continue be lonely for a while.	おやおや、ギルがたりないようですね。 かわいそうに、モグは、とうぶん 一人ぼっちなようです。
おでかけ	お出掛け	n	about to start out, just about to leave or go out,outing, trip	Time for a quiet date in the forest.	今日は二人でお出かけのようです。
きだて	気立て	n	disposition, nature	She is a good-natured Mog. 	とっても気立てのいい メスモーグリです。
うらなう	占う	v5u, vt	to tell someone's fortune, to forecast, to predict, to divine	How 'bout it? Want me to read your fortune!? A bright future! A happy future!	どうですか～？みなさんの未来占うで～
かんにん	堪忍	n, vs	patience, patient endurance, forbearance, tolerance,forgiveness, pardon	Oh, but don't hold it against me if it doesn't come true!	明るい未来、ゆかいな未来！あっ、ひさんな未来が出たらかんにんしてや～！
うらない	占い	n	fortune-telling, divination	Oh, so sorry! I'm a fortune telling machine. The name's…	あらら、すんません！ボクは、占いマシーンです。名前は……
うせもの	失せ物	n	lost article	You kidding? I can find missing things, missing people, anything!	バカにしたらあかんで！失せ物、失せ人なんでもございや！
きち	吉	n, adj-no	good fortune (esp. omikuji fortune-telling result), good luck, auspiciousness	…Ordinary luck. It will be an active fortune.	……中吉。活発な運勢になります
うんせい	運勢	n	fortune, luck	…Ordinary luck. It will be an active fortune.	……中吉。活発な運勢になります
あまえる	甘える	v1, vi	to behave like a spoiled child, to fawn on,to take advantage of, to presume upon (e.g. another's benevolence), to depend on	Give into the good will of others, and something big'll happen after summer.  …Wait…hold on…	周りの人の好意に甘えてひと頑張りしておくと夏以降にどっきりな予感。……なんだこれは？
なつ	夏	n-adv, n-t	summer	Give into the good will of others, and something big'll happen after summer.  …Wait…hold on…	周りの人の好意に甘えてひと頑張りしておくと夏以降にどっきりな予感。……なんだこれは？
いこう	以降	n-adv, n-t	on and after, as from, hereafter, thereafter, since	Give into the good will of others, and something big'll happen after summer.  …Wait…hold on…	周りの人の好意に甘えてひと頑張りしておくと夏以降にどっきりな予感。……なんだこれは？
ペン		n	pen	Huh? Let me try again.	あれっ？　もっぺんやりましょか
あお	青	pref	blue, azure,green,green light (traffic),black (horse coat color),immature, unripe, young	Be careful of forgetfulness. Your lucky color is…blue?	忘れ物に注意。ラッキーカラーは青？
やらす	遣らす	v5s, vt	to allow, to let (somebody) do, to make (somebody) do	Wait, wait give me another chance!	待って～な、もっぺんやらして！
えんか	演歌	n	enka, traditional-style Japanese popular ballad,troubadour	I don't know if it's good or bad…	ええんか、わるいんかようわからんなぁ……
ふほんい	不本意	adj-na, n	reluctant, unwilling, involuntary, unintentional	Being a fortune teller, this is gonna bug me.	占い屋CAIT SITHとしてはこんな占い不本意なんです
みとどける	見届ける	v1, vt	to make sure of, to assure oneself of, to see with one's own eyes, to ascertain	If I don't see how it turns out, I'll never be able to relax. So, I'm going with you!	きっちり見届けんと気持ちがおさまらん。みなさんといっしょに行かせてもらいますわ！
わん	湾	n, n-suf	bay, gulf, inlet	Let's get lotsa GP at Wonder Square and have a blast!	わんだ～すくぇあでＧＰをためてたくさん遊ぼうでちゅ
かいそう	改装	n, vs, adj-no	remodelling, remodeling, reorganization, reorganisation	I'm sorry, we're currently renovating. Please come again.	すいません、今は改装中なんですまた、出直してください
てんじ	展示	n, vs	exhibition, display	I heard that this is the curator's favorite attraction. He even has his collection displayed in the arena.	ここのアトラクションが園長は１番好きらしいね。闘技場内に自分のコレクションを展示してるくらいだからなぁ
つぐなう	償う	v5u, vt	to make up for, to compensate for, to indemnify, to recompense, to redeem (e.g. a fault), to atone for	I don't need to hear it. Pay for your crime below!!	聞くことはない。下で、罪をつぐなうのだ！！
りゅうしゃ	流砂	n	quicksand	Yup, a natural prison in the middle of the desert… surrounded entirely by quicksand.	そや、サバクの流砂にかこまれた自然のかんごくや
とくれい	特例	n	special case, exception	But, there was one special exception…	けど、たしかナンか特例があったような…
あぶ	虻	n	horsefly, gadfly	Whew! That's one of your friends? He sure looks dangerous…	ヒョーッ！あの人も、みなさんのお知り合い？なんやアブなそうな人やなぁ～
すんなり		adv-to, adv, vs	slim, slender, lithe, supple,smoothly, without resistance, without trouble, without difficulty, without dissent, easily, readily	It'll welcome you in, but when you try to leave, it'll swallow ya.	入る時はすんなり人を招き入れるが外に出ようとすると、サバクがそれをこばむんだよ
まねきいれる	招き入れる	v1	to invite in, to show someone in	It'll welcome you in, but when you try to leave, it'll swallow ya.	入る時はすんなり人を招き入れるが外に出ようとすると、サバクがそれをこばむんだよ
てんごく	天国	n, adj-no	paradise, heaven, Kingdom of Heaven	This place is heaven.	ここは天国だぜ
なんせい	南西	n, adj-no	southwest	Go Southwest and you'll meet him.	南西にず～っと向かえば会えるんじゃねぇか？
コンテナ		n	container (e.g. shipping), skip	Container	コーツのコンテナ
がけ	崖	n	cliff, precipice	Heh heh! You sure got guts!	ヘッヘッヘッ！いいこころがけだ
くず	屑	n, adj-f	waste, scrap, garbage, dregs,chad	You don't seem to understand how things work down here. This is the Gold Saucer's garbage dump. And that makes alluv ya scrubs.	おめえ、ここがわかってねえな。ここはゴールドソーサーのゴミすて場てめえらもクズなんだよ
ゆうしょう	優勝	n, vs	overall victory, championship	The only way to get back up there is to win the Chocobo Race.	シャバへもどりてえんならチョコボレースで優勝するしかねえ
わき	脇	n	armpit, under one's arm, side, flank,beside, close to, near, by,aside, to the side, away, out of the way,off-track, off-topic,deuteragonist, supporting role,second verse (in a linked series of poems)	Of course, if you got the boss's permission it'd be a different story, but YOU'll never get that!	ま、ボスの許可でも取れたら別だがなとれるわきゃあねえか？
セリフ		n	serif	Hey that's CLOUD's line! …It's too dangerous, I can't let you get involved…' blah, blah, blah…	それ、CLOUDのセリフ！『危険だ、まきこむわけにはいかない』とかなんとか、ね
おもいっきり	思いっきり	n	with all one's strength, with all one's heart, to the utmost,resolution, decisiveness	Yeah. We're already involved in this.	そうそう。それに私たち、もう思いっきりまきこまれちゃってるんだから
きちんと		adv, vs	properly, accurately, exactly, precisely, regularly,neatly, tidily, orderly	We saw you and hurried here. So come on BARRET, just tell us what's going on.	上でBARRETを見かけてあわてて追いかけてきたんだから。さあBARRET、きちんと説明してね
けんぶつ	見物	n	sightseeing, watching, viewing,sightseer, watcher, spectator	I was on my way home from visiting	建設中の魔晄炉を見物にいった
こらえる	堪える	v1, vt	to bear, to stand, to endure, to put up with,to restrain, to control, to keep a check on,to forgive, to put up with, to pardon	BARRET!! You stay here!!	BARRET！！ここはこらえろ！！
あぶる	炙る	v5r, vt	to warm (e.g. one's hands over a fire), to dry,to toast, to grill, to broil, to roast, to scorch	Watch out!!	あぶねえ！！
てっぽう	鉄砲	n	gun,wooden pole that wrestlers strike in practice,fugu	You can shoot all day and never hit them with aim like that.	下手な鉄砲はいくら撃ってもあたんないんだよ！！
えんご	援護	n, vs	covering, protection, backing, relief	Kya, ha, ha!! Stop playing around and cover me!!	キャハハハハハ！！！ほら、遊んでないで援護しな！！
はなす	離す	v5s, vt	to separate, to part, to divide, to keep apart	Dyne!! Hang on!!	ダイン！！離すんじゃねえぞ！！
かえり	帰り	n	return, coming back	Eleanor… and Marlene… They all waitin' on us…	エレノアが…マリンが……俺たちの帰りを……
つかいもの	使い物	n	useful thing, usable article,present, gift	From then on, I couldn't use my right arm no more.	オレの右腕はもう使い物にならなかった
しゅじゅつ	手術	n, vs, adj-no	surgery, operation, procedure	Back then, I heard the doc say there was another man who got the same operation as me.	そのときの医者から聞いたのさ。オレと同じ手術を望んだ男がもう１人いるってことをな
さわん	左腕	n	left arm,left-handed (baseball pitcher)	But, his was the left arm.	ただし、そいつは左腕が銃になっている
ひとねむり	一眠り	n, vs	nap, short sleep,first sleep of silkworms	Looks like we could get some sleep here.	ここで、ひと眠りできそうだ
とくする	得する	vs-s	to make a profit	You think the dead understand why's? Is hearin' Shinra's excuses gonna make people in Corel understand anything?	それで殺された人間はなっとくするのか？神羅の言い分を聞けばコレル村の人間は了解するのか！？
いいぶん	言い分	n	one's say, one's point,complaint, grievance, objection, excuse	You think the dead understand why's? Is hearin' Shinra's excuses gonna make people in Corel understand anything?	それで殺された人間はなっとくするのか？神羅の言い分を聞けばコレル村の人間は了解するのか！？
りょうかい	了解	int	comprehension, consent, understanding, agreement,OK, roger (on two-way radio)	You think the dead understand why's? Is hearin' Shinra's excuses gonna make people in Corel understand anything?	それで殺された人間はなっとくするのか？神羅の言い分を聞けばコレル村の人間は了解するのか！？
じゅうだん	銃弾	n	bullet (from a rifle)	All they give us is artillery and stupid excuses… What's left is a world of despair and emptiness…	与えられるのは銃弾と不条理…残されるのは絶望と無の世界…それだけだ！！
ふじょうり	不条理	n	absurd, irrational, unreasonable, illogical,absurdity (philosophy)	All they give us is artillery and stupid excuses… What's left is a world of despair and emptiness…	与えられるのは銃弾と不条理…残されるのは絶望と無の世界…それだけだ！！
ぜつぼう	絶望	n, vs, adj-no	despair, hopelessness	All they give us is artillery and stupid excuses… What's left is a world of despair and emptiness…	与えられるのは銃弾と不条理…残されるのは絶望と無の世界…それだけだ！！
しょうき	正気	n, adj-no	sanity, consciousness, soberness	Dyne…are you crazy!?	ダイン……正気か！？
かけがえ	掛け替え	n	replacement, substitution, rebuilding, changing	I lost something irreplaceable. I don't know where it went wrong…	かけがえのないものを失った……どこで……くいちがっちまったのかな……
くいちがう	食い違う	v5u, vi	to cross each other, to run counter to, to differ, to clash, to go awry	I lost something irreplaceable. I don't know where it went wrong…	かけがえのないものを失った……どこで……くいちがっちまったのかな……
ノア	ＮＯＲ	n	NOR (boolean operator)	Give that pendant to Marlene… It was…Eleanor's… my wife's…a memento…	そのペンダントをマリンに…エレ…ノアの……女房の……かたみ……
なにしろ	何しろ	adv	at any rate, anyhow, anyway, in any case, because, as you know, for you see	Dyne didn't care who anyone was…	なにしろダインはだれかれかまわず……
しゅだん	手段	n	means, way, measure	I already told you, there's only one way to get outta here.	前に、少し言ったと思うがここからでる手段は、ただひとつ
おどす	脅す	v5s, vt	to threaten, to menace, to frighten (into doing)	Noooo! Really, even if you threaten me!!	だーーっ！いくら、おどしてもダメだ！！
きりつ	規律	n	order, observance, discipline,rules, law, regulations	If I do, the whole system down here'll get messed up!! An' I can't do that!	ここの規律がメチャクチャになっちまう！！これは、ゆずれねぇ！
とりひき	取引	n, vs	transactions, dealings, business	OK, OK, I'll let one go up there. After that, he's gotta deal with Dio.	ひ、１人は上に送ってやる。後は、そいつがディオと取り引きするなり、なんなりしな
てきにん	適任	adj-na, adj-no	competent, suitable, qualified	You're right. CLOUD should do it.	そうだな、CLOUDが適任だろう
まとまる	纏まる	v5r, vi	to find resolution, to be settled, to be agreed on, to be completed,to be collected, to be assembled, to be brought together,to be well arranged, to be in order, to be unified, to take shape, to be coherent	Have you decided?	は、話は、まとまったか？
マネージャー		n	manager (e.g. of a business, an idol, etc.),in a sports team (esp. at school) someone who does the routine drudge work	All you need now is a manager…	じゃあ、あとはマネージャーか
みため	見た目	n	appearance	This is Ester. She may look kinda funny…	こいつはエスト。　見た目は変だろ？
マネジメント		n	management	But there's no better manager in the races…	でも、チョコボレースのマネージメントで右に出るやつはいねぇ
はんざい	犯罪	n, adj-no	crime, offence, offense	Oh yeah, getting back to the other thing, there are many different types of Chocobo jockeys. It's not only for criminals.	そうそう、さっきの話の続きだけどチョコボレーサーにはいろんな人がいるの。犯罪者だけのレースってわけじゃないのよ
めいせい	名声	n	fame, reputation, renown	Some people compete for the fame, some people compete for the money, some only for glory… And then there're people like you.	名声のために戦い続けている人お金のために戦う人レースにのみ生き場所を感じている人…あなた、みたいな人をふくめてね
ふくめる	含める	v1, vt	to include (in a group or scope),to instruct, to make one understand,to include (a nuance), to put in (an implication),to put in (someone's) mouth,to permeate with flavor	Some people compete for the fame, some people compete for the money, some only for glory… And then there're people like you.	名声のために戦い続けている人お金のために戦う人レースにのみ生き場所を感じている人…あなた、みたいな人をふくめてね
きじょう	騎乗	n, vs	riding (on horseback), mounting (a horse)	Oh yeah, I'll teach you how to ride a Chocobo.	あっ、そうだチョコボの騎乗方法教えておくわね
げんえき	現役	n, adj-no	active duty, active service,student taking (university) entrance exams while still enrolled in school, student who passed their university entrance exams on the first try	This is Joe, one of the top Chocobo Jockeys.	彼はジョー、現役チョコボレーサーのトップをいく人よ
トップ		n	top,top position,senior management, senior bureaucrat	This is Joe, one of the top Chocobo Jockeys.	彼はジョー、現役チョコボレーサーのトップをいく人よ
いご	以後	n-adv, n-t	after this, from now on, hereafter,thereafter, since (then), after	Nice to meet you, CLOUD.	以後お見知りおきをCLOUD君
みしり	見知り	n	recognition, acquaintance	Nice to meet you, CLOUD.	以後お見知りおきをCLOUD君
おき	沖	n	open sea	Nice to meet you, CLOUD.	以後お見知りおきをCLOUD君
じかに	直に	adv	directly, in person, firsthand	If you're with Ester, then…	しかし、エストがじかについているということは……
タブー		n	taboo	Sorry…we're not supposed to ask about the past here.	いや……ここで過去を聞くのはタブーだったな…
あんま	あん摩	n	massage (esp. anma, a traditional form of Japanese massage),masseur, masseuse, massager,blind person (as many were traditionally massagers)	Don't get cocky. Skills don't matter once you get in the race…	あんまし、いい気になるんじゃねぇぞ。腕っぷしなんてレースになりゃあ関係ねぇからな
うでっぷし	腕っ節	n	physical strength	Don't get cocky. Skills don't matter once you get in the race…	あんまし、いい気になるんじゃねぇぞ。腕っぷしなんてレースになりゃあ関係ねぇからな
しゅつじょう	出場	n, vs	(stage) appearance, performance,participation (e.g. in a tournament)	The race will start in a few moments. Will the jockeys for the next race please proceed to the paddock.	まもなく、レースがスタートします次のレースに出場のチョコボレーサーはパドックまでおこしください
パドック		n	paddock	The race will start in a few moments. Will the jockeys for the next race please proceed to the paddock.	まもなく、レースがスタートします次のレースに出場のチョコボレーサーはパドックまでおこしください
モード		n	mode (musical mode, mode of probability distribution, state of physical system),fashion	Well, if you really want to win, just push [ASSIST] and try the 'AUTO' mode.	もう、本当に勝ちたいのなら『ＳＥＬＥＣＴ』ボタンでオートモードにして走ってみてよ
はれる	晴れる	v1, vi	to clear up, to clear away, to be sunny, to stop raining,to refresh (e.g. spirits),to be cleared (e.g. of a suspicion),to be dispelled, to be banished	Congratulations!! Now you're home free!	おめでとう！！これで晴れて自由の身よ
けんげん	権限	n	power, authority, jurisdiction	I heard about Dyne from Ester. Now that you won, I'm granting you and your friends a full pardon, and setting you all free.	ダインのことはエスト君から聞いた。少年が勝つことができたなら私の権限で、君の仲間の自由も約束しよう
みのうえ	身の上	exp, n	one's station in life, one's personal history, one's circumstances,one's lot, one's destiny, one's future	Sorry I couldn't be there to tell you this in person, but I'm a very busy man. Sincerely, Dio	これでも、多忙な身の上。手紙という形でしつれいした。ではディオちゃん　より
このあいだ	この間	n-t, n-adv	the other day, lately, recently, during this period,meanwhile, in the meantime	P.S. I recently met Sephiroth. I'll bet he's pretty popular with boys your age.	Ｐ．Ｓ．この間、私はセフィロスにあったぞ少年たちの年代では、彼のファンもいるだろう
ねんだい	年代	n	age, era, period, date	P.S. I recently met Sephiroth. I'll bet he's pretty popular with boys your age.	Ｐ．Ｓ．この間、私はセフィロスにあったぞ少年たちの年代では、彼のファンもいるだろう
るまた	ル又	n	kanji radical 79 at right	I'll take care of your registration and everything. I'll see you again.	また私が、登録とかいろんなことして、あ・げ・るまた、会いましょうね