ジャングル		n	jungle	Jungle	ジャングル
ホワイト		n	white,correction fluid, white-out	Received "White M-phone"!	『ホワイトメガホン』を手にいれた！
いなか	田舎	n, adj-no	rural area, countryside, the sticks,hometown	It's been close to 10 years since he left for the city, saying that he didn't want to live in the country…	こんなイナカじゃくらせないとか言い残して都会へいったままもう、かれこれ１０年近く……
あれこれ	彼此	adv	this and that, this or that, one thing or another, this way and that,around, about, round about, roughly, nearly, almost	It's been close to 10 years since he left for the city, saying that he didn't want to live in the country…	こんなイナカじゃくらせないとか言い残して都会へいったままもう、かれこれ１０年近く……
ガールフレンド		n	girl friend, girlfriend	I remember he wrote us 6 or 7 years ago saying that he had a girlfriend. Could that have been you?	そういえば６、７年前に手紙がきてガールフレンドができましたって書いてあったけど、あんたかい？
しっと	嫉妬	n, vs	jealousy, envy	(…jealous…envious…)	（やきもち……しっと……）
いてる	凍てる	v1, vi	to freeze, to be frozen over, to congeal	Are you…jealous? Hmm?  Hmmm? Are you, CLOUD?	もしかして……やきもちやいてる？ん？　んん？どうなのかな、CLOUDくん？
いかにも	如何にも	adv, int	indeed, really, [object Object]	Your face tells me differently.	いかにも知ってるって顔してるぞ
けんそん	謙遜	n, vs, adj-na, adj-no	modesty, humility, being humble	Don't be so humble!	けんそんしちゃってぇ！
どりょく	努力	n, vs	effort, exertion, endeavour, endeavor, hard work, striving	Hard work pays off, huh.	努力はむくわれるってわけね
むくう	報う	v5u	to reward, to recompense, to repay,to retaliate, to get revenge	Hard work pays off, huh.	努力はむくわれるってわけね
はたして	果たして	adv	as was expected, just as one thought, sure enough,really, actually, ever	Do people really need reactors to live?	はたして、人が生きていくのに魔晄炉が必要なのでしょうか？
ほお	頬	n	cheek (of face)	You want something?	ほお……何か用かい？
しゅくはく	宿泊	n, vs	lodging	Need a room?	宿泊したい
けっか	結果	n, vs	result, consequence, outcome, effect,coming to fruition, bearing fruit	Shinra built the reactor, without even thinking about the town's safety. And, this is the result.	神羅のやつらは、村の安全など考えずに、魔晄炉を建設した。その結果が、これさ
いまだに	未だに	adv	still, even now, until this very day	It's been a while since the explosion, but you can still find the pieces it left all over town.	魔晄炉の爆発事故が起こってからずいぶんたつが、そのつめあとはいまだに村のあちこちに残っている
じゅうにん	住人	n	dweller, inhabitant, resident	We voted to outlaw the use of Mako energy and live with nature, ever since the explosion.	わたしたちゴンガガ村の住人は魔晄炉の爆発事故があってからは魔晄エネルギーの利用を止めて自然とともに生きることを選んだの
のばす	伸ばす	v5s, vt	to grow long (e.g. hair, nails),to lengthen, to extend, to stretch,to reach out, to hold out,to straighten, to smooth out,to spread evenly (dough, cream, etc.),to dilute, to thin out,to postpone,to prolong,to strengthen, to develop, to expand	Reach for it	手をのばしてみる
ききおぼえ	聞き覚え	n	learning by ear,memory of having heard something before	…But That name sounds familiar…	しかし……その名前には、聞き覚えがある……
よこす	寄越す	v5s, vt	to send, to forward,to hand over (e.g. money)	I can't believe he hasn't contacted us in 10 years…! …After all, we're his parents.	１０年も連絡もよこさんとは……なんちゅう息子じゃ
ぎょうしょう	行商	n, vs, adj-no	monger, peddling	I am a traveling salesman, going around the world.	わたしは、世界を旅する行商人。
むしょうに	無性に	adv	excessively, very much	Even I get homesick and want to see my family.	そんなわたしだが、むしょうに家族に会いたくなることがある
あいする	愛する	vs-s, vt	to love	I have a favor to ask of you. Can you get this letter to my lovely wife?	そこであなたに、たのみがある。どうかわたしの愛する奥さんにこの手紙をとどけてもらいたい
とどける	届ける	v1, vt	to deliver, to forward, to send,to report, to notify, to file notice (to the authorities), to give notice, to register	I have a favor to ask of you. Can you get this letter to my lovely wife?	そこであなたに、たのみがある。どうかわたしの愛する奥さんにこの手紙をとどけてもらいたい
もくぜん	目前	n, adj-no	before one's very eyes, under one's nose, imminence, close at hand	What's going on in a world about to end? Is kindness the first to vanish?	なんということだ……死が目前に迫っているこの世界ではもはや人情もかれはてたか……
はてる	果てる	v1, aux-v	to end, to be finished, to be exhausted,to die, to perish,to do utterly, to do completely	What's going on in a world about to end? Is kindness the first to vanish?	なんということだ……死が目前に迫っているこの世界ではもはや人情もかれはてたか……
しくむ	仕組む	v5m, vt	to devise, to arrange, to plan, to plot	Planet structure? …Who cares about that?	星のしくみ？……どうでもいいわ、そんなこと
コスモ		n	cosmos	Why don't you go ask Bugenhagen of Cosmo Canyon hard questions like that?	そういうこむずかしい事はコスモキャニオンのブーゲンハーゲンという人に聞けば？
キャニオン		n	canyon	Why don't you go ask Bugenhagen of Cosmo Canyon hard questions like that?	そういうこむずかしい事はコスモキャニオンのブーゲンハーゲンという人に聞けば？
とも	友	n	friend, companion, comrade, pal	You lost? When that happens the only ones you can count on are your friends.	道にまよったのじゃな？そういう時に一番たよりになるのは友、じゃよ
せんけつ	先決	n, vs	deciding first, settling (a matter) first, first priority	The first thing you gotta do is find your best friend.	もっとも大切な友を探すこと。それが先決じゃて
ならぶ	並ぶ	v5b, vi	to line up, to stand in a line,to rival, to match, to equal	This reactor's useless, but I hear there's still Huge Materia at the Corel, Fort Condor, and the Junon reactors.	ここの魔晄炉はもう使い物にならんが【コレル】、【コンドルフォート】、【ジュノン】の魔晄炉の中には、大きなマテリアが残っているそうじゃ
しょせん	所詮	adv	after all	Shinra's tried a lot of things, but it's only HUMAN. It's fate that Meteor will kill the people.	神羅もいろんな手をつくしたがしょせん、ちっぽけな人間のやること。メテオによって人が滅びるのは運命なのじゃよ
わかもの	若者	n, adj-no	young man, young woman, young people, youth, youngsters	Tell me, young man.	おしえてくれ、若者よ
でばん	出番	n	one's turn, one's shift,one's turn on stage, screen time, screentime	Hmm… Then it's time…	そうか……出番だな、と
いきむ	息む	v5m, vi	to strain (one's stomach), to bear down (during childbirth), to push down	Then, we're counting on you. I'll report to Tseng!	じゃ、先輩たち。あとはよろしくおねがいします。私はツォンさんに報告にいきま～す！
かり	借り	n	borrowing, debt, loan	Payback time for what you did in Sector 7.	７番街の借りを返すぞ、と
いばしょ	居場所	n	whereabouts, place, location,place where one belongs, where one fits in, place where one can be oneself	I don't like it. How'd they find out where we were?	気にいらねえぜ。どうしてオレたちの居場所がわかったんだ？
あきらか	明らか	adj-na, n	obvious, evident, clear, plain	Interesting… They were definitely waiting for us.	興味深い……やつらはあきらかにまちぶせしていたようだが
びこう	尾行	n, vs	shadow, tail, following	They followed us… But there weren't any signs of it. Then, that means…	尾行されたか……いや、そんな気配はなかった。ということは……
けはい	気配	n	indication, sign, hint, presence, trend,quotation (esp. stock market)	They followed us… But there weren't any signs of it. Then, that means…	尾行されたか……いや、そんな気配はなかった。ということは……
ないつう	内通	n, vs	secret understanding, collusion	…someone's been informing them.	……だれかが内通しているのか
うたがう	疑う	v5u, vt	to doubt, to distrust, to be suspicious of, to suspect	I hate this. Now everyone's gonna blame me because I'm new.	たまらんなぁ～。そんなん、新入りのボクがうたがわれるんに決まってますやん
てさき	手先	n	fingers, fingertips,underling, stooge, tool, pawn, minion	It means there's a Shinra spy…	神羅の手先がいる……ということか？
さきまわり	先回り	n, vs	going on ahead, forestalling, anticipating, arrival before another	Man, looks like they've taken a short cut.	気にくわねぇな。先回りされてるみてぇだ
かねもうけ	金儲け	n, vs	money-making	The Shinra build reactors to make money. And this is what happens.	神羅のやつらは、金もうけのために魔晄炉をつくる。そして、その結果がこれだ
おうぼう	横暴	adj-na, n	violence, oppression, high-handedness, tyranny, despotism	You saw that village. It's always the powerless that suffer from tyrants like Shinra.	見ただろう、あの村を。神羅の横暴でよ、被害にあうのはいつでも力を持たない人間だぜ
けっせい	結成	n, vs	formation, combination	But I can't let 'em do that. That's why I formed AVALANCHE to fight 'em.	オレは、そんなことは許せねぇ。『アバランチ』を結成して神羅カンパニーと戦ってるのもそんな世界を変えてえからだ
しっかく	失格	n, vs	disqualification, elimination, incapacity (legal)	This reactor's a failure.	ここの魔晄炉は失格ねえ
ぞんじる	存じる	v1	to think, feel, consider, know, etc.	…No I haven't seen it. I'll get on it right away.	……存じません。さっそく調査します
じょうし	上司	n	(one's) superior, (one's) boss, the higher-ups	Oh…sorry! I forgot Heidegger was your boss! Ha ha ha!	あら、ごめんなさい！ハイデッカーはあなたの上司だったわね！キャハハハハ！