ていいん	定員	n	fixed number (of people), prescribed number (of regular personnel, students, etc.), quota, numerical limit, complement,capacity (of a bus, boat, theatre, etc.), seating capacity	Ummgah! I'm sorry it's full now, so I can't let you enter.	んが！今は定員いっぱいなので中には入れてあげられません
まなぶ	学ぶ	v5b	to study (in depth), to learn, to take lessons in	Leaving already? But it appears your friends still want to learn more about the Planet…	おや、もうご出発ですか？あなたのお友だちはまだ星について学びたいみたいですが……
むよう	無用	adj-na, n	useless, futile,unnecessary, needless,not on business, unrelated, unauthorised, unauthorized,prohibited, banned, forbidden	Hm? If you're looking for Bugenhagen, he went to the Sealed Door.	あれ？ブーゲンハーゲン様なら『無用の扉』のほうへ行かれましたよ
とちる		v5r, vi	to flub (one's lines),to be flustered, to be confused,to bungle, to mess up, to blunder	Remember, there's a steel door on the way to Bugenhagen's room.	ホラ、ブーゲン様のお部屋へ行くとちゅうのあの鉄の扉ですよ
ふきつ	不吉	adj-na, n	ominous, sinister, unlucky, inauspicious	Oh, it's you. This is terrible. The color of that unlucky star…	ああ、あなたたちですか。大変なことになってしまいましたね。あの不吉な星の色……
こわがる	怖がる	v5r, vi	to be afraid of, to fear, to dread, to be nervous (about), to be shy (of)	The children are all so scared that they won't even go outside.	子供たちなんか、こわがって外へ出てこようとしないんですよ
ささえ	支え	n	support, stay, prop	Bugenhagen is what keeps our hearts strong…	ブーゲンハーゲン様は今の私たちの心のささえです……
いちぞく	一族	n	family, relatives, dependents,household	My tribe were protectors of those who appreciate this beautiful canyon and the Planet.	私の一族はこの美しい谷と星を理解する人々を守ってくらしてきた
せんし	戦士	n	soldier, combatant, warrior	My brave mother fought and died here, but my cowardly father left her… I am the last of my race.	だが勇ましい戦士であった母は死にふぬけの父は逃げだし一族は私だけになってしまった
みさげる	見下げる	v1, vt	to look down over, to look down on	Yes. My father was a wastrel.	ああ。父は見下げたふぬけ野郎だ
しめい	使命	n	mission, errand,task, duty, obligation	And so the mission I inherited from my ancestors is to protect this place. My journey ends here.	だから、ここを守るのは残された私の使命だ。私の旅はここで終わりだ
キャンドル		n	candle	This fire is called 'Cosmo Candle'. It has burned for generations.	この火はね。『コスモキャンドル』なのです。むかーしむかしからもやされつづけてるのです
もやす	燃やす	v5s, vt	to burn,to burn with (emotion, feeling), to be fired up	This fire is called 'Cosmo Candle'. It has burned for generations.	この火はね。『コスモキャンドル』なのです。むかーしむかしからもやされつづけてるのです
ちょうろう	長老	n	elder, senior,senior monk,dean, presbyter, patriarch	The elders said something horrifying occurred, but I really don't know much else about it.	とってもこわーいことがあったって長老はいってたけどあたし、よくわからないのです
しんぴ	神秘	n, adj-na, adj-no	mystery, mysteriousness, secret	So this is Cosmo Canyon… Quite a mysterious place.	これがコスモキャニオン……なるほど、神秘的な場所ですね
けんがく	見学	n, vs	inspection, study by observation, field trip	Why don't you look around Cosmo Canyon while I fix the car?	車がなおるまでコスモキャニオンを見学されては？
からかう	揶揄う	v5u	to ridicule, to tease, to mock, to chaff, to razz, to banter with, to make fun of, to poke fun at, to make cracks about	…You don't even have that much. Don't tease me, okay?	……そんなお金持ってないじゃないですか。からかわないでください
ソファ		n	sofa, couch	There was a bottle on the sofa there a couple of days ago…was it yours?	この前、あそこのソファーにきれいなビンが置いてあったんですがあなたがたのですか？
てんもんだい	天文台	n	astronomical observatory	Yeah? I heard there's an awesome observatory here. I'd like to see it if I have a chance.	やはりそうですか。なんでもここにはスゴイ天文台があるそうですからね。ぜひ一度見てみたいものです
おどかす	脅かす	v5s, vt	to threaten, to menace, to intimidate,to startle, to frighten, to scare	Don't scare me like that. I almost fell over.	おどかさないでくださいよ。危うく落ちるところだった
パブ		n	pub	Pub "Starlet"	パブ『スターレット』
たちよる	立ち寄る	v5r, vi	to stop by, to drop in for a short visit	It's right near Cosmo Candle!	おたちよりください！聖火コスモキャンドルのすぐそばです！
せいか	聖火	n	sacred fire (torch),Olympic flame	It's right near Cosmo Candle!	おたちよりください！聖火コスモキャンドルのすぐそばです！
あらそう	争う	v5u, vi	to compete, to contest, to contend,to quarrel, to argue, to dispute, to be at variance, to oppose,to deny (e.g. evidence)	The people of this canyon hate to compete. So almost everything here are replicas.	この谷の人間は、あらそいをきらうからね。ここにあるのも、ほとんどレプリカなのさ
きらう	嫌う	v5u, vt	to hate, to dislike, to loathe	The people of this canyon hate to compete. So almost everything here are replicas.	この谷の人間は、あらそいをきらうからね。ここにあるのも、ほとんどレプリカなのさ
アルバイト		n	part-time job, side job,part-time worker,albite	Now hiring!	アルバイトぼしゅう！
ぼる		v5r	to ask a high price, to overcharge	Now hiring!	アルバイトぼしゅう！
しゅう	州	suf	state, province, county, oblast, department (of ancient China),continent,dear	Now hiring!	アルバイトぼしゅう！
もとむ	求む	v2m-s, vt	to want, to wish for,to request, to demand,to seek, to search for, to pursue (pleasure), to hunt (a job),to purchase, to buy	can stand long hours of boredom!	ガマンづよい方求む！
あわせ	合わせ	n, n-suf, pref	joint together, opposite, facing	For details, contact	くわしいお間い合わせは
ようするに	要するに	exp, adv	in short, in a word, to sum up, to put it simply, to make a long story short, after all	In other words, it doesn't exist for us, but it did for the Ancients.	ようするにワシらには存在しないが古代種にとっては存在した
ふた	蓋	n	cover, lid, cap	The Promised Land is the resting place of the Ancients.	ミもフタもない言い方をすれば約束の地は古代種の死に場所じゃ
しにばしょ	死に場所	n	place to die, place of death	The Promised Land is the resting place of the Ancients.	ミもフタもない言い方をすれば約束の地は古代種の死に場所じゃ
せいしん	精神	n	mind, spirit, soul, heart, ethos,attitude, mentality, will, intention,spirit (of a matter), essence, fundamental significance	The life of the Ancients is one continuous journey. A journey to grow trees and plants, raise animals, and make Mako energy.	古代種の人生はきびしい旅の日々じゃ。草や木、動物、あらゆる生き物を増やして精神エネルギーをそだてる旅
しゅんかん	瞬間	n-adv, n-t	moment, second, instant	Huh? Supreme Happiness? I believe that, for the Ancients, it was the moment that they were able to return to their Planet, That moment when they were released from their fate, and gained their supreme happiness…	あん？　至上の幸福？古代種にとっては星に帰る瞬間運命から解き放たれる瞬間それは至上の幸福ではなかったか……と
ときはなつ	解き放つ	v5t, vt	to release	Huh? Supreme Happiness? I believe that, for the Ancients, it was the moment that they were able to return to their Planet, That moment when they were released from their fate, and gained their supreme happiness…	あん？　至上の幸福？古代種にとっては星に帰る瞬間運命から解き放たれる瞬間それは至上の幸福ではなかったか……と
しんじつ	真実	adj-na, adv, n, adj-no	truth, reality	At least that's what I believe. I really don't know whether or not it's true.	ワシはそう考えておるんじゃ。今となっては真実はわからんがの
むかしばなし	昔話	n	old tale, folk tale, legend,reminiscence	I'd appreciate it if you didn't talk about such foolish things as legends and old wives tales.	悪いんじゃが、伝説とか昔話とかワシにはそんな話しかしてやれんよ
げんてん	原点	n	origin (coordinates), starting point	Guess you could say this is where AVALANCHE was born.	言ってみりゃ、ここがアバランチの原点だな
ささやく	囁く	v5k, vi	to whisper, to murmur,to rumor, to rumour	Were you able to hear the stars whispers?	星のささやきはきこえましたか？
オリジナル		adj-no, n	original,unique (e.g. product), signature, exclusive, one-of-a-kind, custom	Welcome. How 'bout our original cocktail, 'Cosmo Candle?'	いらっしゃい。うちのオリジナルカクテル『コスモキャンドル』はいかがです？
がら	柄	n-suf	pattern, design,body build, figure, physique,essential qualities, character, nature,appropriate to, fitting of, suitable for	A drink now and then is good for you. It'll relax you a bit. …If you know when to stop.	お酒はいいですよ。人の心をほがらかにさせますから。……ホドホドならね
いやす	癒す	v5s, vt	to heal, to cure	That reminds me. I heard that someone here in Cosmo Canyon is selling some Healing Materia.	そういえば、このコスモキャニオンのどこかに、いやしのマテリアがあるという話を聞いたことがありますが
ながばなし	長話	n, vs	long talk	…Hmm. That's no fun… I wanna tell a story.	……チェッ。つまらんのう。長話をしたいのう
なぞ	謎	adj-no	riddle, puzzle, enigma, mystery,enigmatic, mysterious	He was a Shinra scholar who spent his life studying the Ancients.	博士は古代種のナゾを追い続けた 神羅の学者だったのじゃ。
がくしゃ	学者	n, adj-no	scholar	He was a Shinra scholar who spent his life studying the Ancients.	博士は古代種のナゾを追い続けた 神羅の学者だったのじゃ。
きまじめ	生真面目	adj-na, n	too serious, person who is too serious, honesty, sincerity	He was a serious person, you never would have thought he'd be in Shinra.	神羅っぽくない生真面目な人じゃ
したい	死体	n, adj-no	dead body, corpse, cadaver	Must've been about 30 years ago, when he found the corpse of an Ancient. He was elated!	かれこれ３０年ちかく前になるがついに古代種の死体を見つけたとよろこんでおったな
さけずき	酒好き	adj-na, n	drinker	That the old man that likes to drink in Cosmo Canyon, wants to hear about the Ancients.	コスモキャニオンの酒好きジイさんが古代種の話を聞きたがっているとな
やまやま	山々	adv	(many) mountains,very much (esp. wanting to do something one cannot), greatly, really	Well, there's lots to talk about, but most things about the Ancients are all legend and folk tales, and no one knows the truth.	ま、話したいのはやまやまじゃが古代種のことは言い伝えや伝説ばかりで真実はもうだ～れにもわからんのじゃ
たらふく	鱈腹	adv	(eating or drinking) to one's heart's content	Maybe this is the way it should be. Who knows? I'm full of booze…	これはこれでいいのかもしれん。酒もたらふく飲めたしの……
のめる	飲める	v1	to be able to drink,to be worth drinking	Maybe this is the way it should be. Who knows? I'm full of booze…	これはこれでいいのかもしれん。酒もたらふく飲めたしの……
しの	篠	n	thin-culmed dwarf bamboo (growing in clusters),Japanese transverse bamboo flute (high-pitched; usu. with seven holes),sliver (strand of loose fibers)	Maybe this is the way it should be. Who knows? I'm full of booze…	これはこれでいいのかもしれん。酒もたらふく飲めたしの……
じざけ	地酒	n	local sake	Our cocktails are good but our wine is the best! Please stop in the Turtle's Paradise!!	カクテルもいいけどやっぱり地酒がいちばん！ぜひいちど居酒屋『かめ道楽』へ！！
つり	釣り	n, vs	fishing, angling,change (e.g. for a purchase),trolling, writing false posts online	…num…yawn…Sir… You…forgot…your… …change.	ムニャムニャ……お客さん……おつり……おつりわすれてます……
ぐする	具する	vs-s	to accompany, to follow,to assemble (necessary items), to prepare	I'm…I'm so sorry! It seems I've gotten used to being lazy…	し、しつれいしました！いや、すっかりナマケぐせがついてしまったみたいで……
ぶつかる	打つかる	v5r, vi	to strike against, to collide with, to bump into, to conflict,to encounter, to meet,to clash	Oh man… Everything will be over, once Meteor hits…	あ～あ……あの星がぶつかったらぜんぶおしまいか……
ディナー		n	dinner	Oh, welcome home. You want dinner first? Or…	あら、おかえりなさい。ね、すぐディナーにする？それとも……
スイートホーム		n	sweet home	Wh…who are you? You…can't just come barging into my home uninvited!!	だ、誰ですかアナタ！か、かってに人のスイートホームに入ってくるなんて！！
かなしむ	悲しむ	v5m, vt	to be sad, to mourn for, to regret	No need to be sad, even if something should happen. Everything will return to the Planet…Bugenhagen says so.	何がおきても悲しむことはない。すべては星に帰っていく……ブーゲンハーゲン様はそうおっしゃいます
おっしゃる	仰る	v5aru, vt	to say, to speak, to tell, to talk	No need to be sad, even if something should happen. Everything will return to the Planet…Bugenhagen says so.	何がおきても悲しむことはない。すべては星に帰っていく……ブーゲンハーゲン様はそうおっしゃいます
ぷかぷか		adv, adv-to	lightly (floating), buoyantly,puffing (on a pipe, cigarette, etc.),tooting (a trumpet, horn, etc.), blowing (a flute, whistle)	…Don't worry. Grandpa will come back floating, saying 'Ho Ho Hoooo' again…	……だいじょうぶ。じっちゃんのことだからまたすぐにプカプカやってくるさ。『ホーホーホウ』って……
すくなくとも	少なくとも	adv	at least	No, maybe I AM a bit afraid. But, whenever I'm reading 'Study of Planet Life,' I can forget all my fears.	いや、本当は怖いのかもしれない。でも、少なくとも『星命学』の本をよんでいる間は、そのことを忘れられるんです……
マジック		n	magic,Magic Marker, felt-tip pen, permanent marker,magic number	Received "Magic Source"!	『マジックアップ』を手にいれた！
むくち	無口	adj-no, adj-na	reticence, taciturnity, silent person,reticent, taciturn, silent	He's quiet and very deep. You thought he was an adult?	無口で考え深い。あんたはナナキのことを立派な大人だと思っていたのかな？
くじる	抉る	v5r, vt	to stick into and move around, to dig around in, to pick (i.e. one's teeth)	I want to grow up to be able to protect you and the village.	はやくじっちゃんたちを守れるようになりたかったんだよ
ほろぼす	滅ぼす	v5s, vt	to destroy, to overthrow, to wreck, to ruin	To do that now would destroy you in the long run.	せのびをするといつかは身をほろぼす
みのほど	身の程	exp, n	one's social position, one's place, one's standing	Well, that's a bad example. Looking up too much makes you lose perspective.	あれが悪い見本じゃ。上ばかり見ていて自分の身のほどを忘れておる
ひめい	悲鳴	n, vs	shriek, scream	I hear the cries of the Planet.	星の悲鳴が聞こえるのじゃ
ふかのう	不可能	adj-na, n	impossible	Impossible. What can humans do?	そんなことは不可能じゃ。人間なんぞに何ができる
ビラ		n	holiday house, villa	Here, over here. The door's unlocked, come in.	お～い、こっちじゃ。とびらのカギは開いとるから入ってくるがいい
フワフワ		adv-to, adv, vs	lightly (floating, drifting, etc.), buoyantly,soft, fluffy, spongy,unsteadily, flightily, fickly, frivolously	'Ho Ho Hoooo.' I may be light, But I'm not as young as Nanaki.	『ホーホーホウ』なんてフワフワしてても、ナナキのように若くはないからして……
しくみ	仕組み	n, vs	structure, construction, arrangement, contrivance, mechanism, workings,plan, plot, contrivance	All the workings of space are entered into this 3D Holographic System.	この宇宙の仕組みが全てこの立体ホログラフィシステムにインプットされておる
りったい	立体	n, adj-no	solid body, three-dimensional object,multi-storey car park	All the workings of space are entered into this 3D Holographic System.	この宇宙の仕組みが全てこの立体ホログラフィシステムにインプットされておる
ホログラフィ		n	holography	All the workings of space are entered into this 3D Holographic System.	この宇宙の仕組みが全てこの立体ホログラフィシステムにインプットされておる
インプット		n, vs	input	All the workings of space are entered into this 3D Holographic System.	この宇宙の仕組みが全てこの立体ホログラフィシステムにインプットされておる
ながれぼし	流れ星	n	shooting star, falling star, meteor,star (white patch on the forehead of a horse)	Hey! A shooting star!	あっ！　流れ星！
かんげき	感激	n, vs	deep emotion, impression, inspiration	I'm so overwhelmed!	感激もんですわ～！
くちる	朽ちる	v1, vi	to rot, to decay,to die in obscurity,to be forgotten with time	The body decomposes, and returns to the Planet. That much everyone knows. What about their consciousness, their hearts and their souls?	身体は朽ち、星に帰る。これは広く知られているな。では、意識、心、精神はどうじゃ？
かけめぐる	駆け巡る	v5r, vi	to run about, to rush about	The spirits that return to the Planet, merge with one another and roam the Planet.	星に帰った精神はまざりあい、星をかけめぐる
わかれ	分かれ	n	offshoot, branch, fork	They roam, converge, and divide, becoming a swell, called the 'Lifestream'.	星をかけめぐり、まざり、分かれ『ライフストリーム』と呼ばれるうねりとなる
うねり	畝ねり	n	undulation, winding, meandering,swell (of waves), surge, billow, roller	They roam, converge, and divide, becoming a swell, called the 'Lifestream'.	星をかけめぐり、まざり、分かれ『ライフストリーム』と呼ばれるうねりとなる
しゅくふく	祝福	n, vs, adj-no	blessing	A new life…children are blessed with Spirit Energy and are brought into the world.	新しい命……子供たちは精神エネルギーの祝福を受けてうまれてくる
れいがい	例外	n, adj-no	exception	Of course there are exceptions, but this is the way of the world.	むろんいくつかの例外はあるがこれがこの世界の仕組みじゃ
ながれ	流れ	n	stream, current, flow,course of events	Ho Ho Hoooo. Spirit Energy is efficient BECAUSE it exists within nature.	ホーホーホウ。精神エネルギーは自然の流れの中でこそその役割を果たすのじゃ
やくわり	役割	n	part, assigning (allotment of) parts, role, duties	Ho Ho Hoooo. Spirit Energy is efficient BECAUSE it exists within nature.	ホーホーホウ。精神エネルギーは自然の流れの中でこそその役割を果たすのじゃ
はたす	果たす	v5s, aux-v	to accomplish, to achieve, to carry out, to fulfill, to fulfil, to realize, to execute, to perform, to do,to do ... completely, to do ... entirely	Ho Ho Hoooo. Spirit Energy is efficient BECAUSE it exists within nature.	ホーホーホウ。精神エネルギーは自然の流れの中でこそその役割を果たすのじゃ
かこう	加工	n, vs	manufacturing, processing, treatment, machining	When Spirit Energy is forcefully extracted, and manufactured, it can't accomplish its true purpose.	むりやり吸い上げられ加工された精神エネルギーは本来の役割を果たさん
ずんずん		adv	rapidly (e.g. progress, moving forward), growing visibly, quickly, steadily, by leaps and bounds	Everyday Mako reactors suck up Spirit Energy, diminishing it.	魔晄炉に吸い上げられずんずん減っていく精神エネルギー
かど	過度	adj-na, n, adj-no	excess, immoderation	Spirit Energy is compressed in reactors and processed into Mako energy. All living things are being used up and thrown away.	魔晄炉によって過度に凝縮される精神エネルギー。魔晄エネルギーなどと名づけられ使いすてられているのは、すべて星の命じゃ
まさに	正に	adv	exactly, surely, certainly, just,right then, just then, at that moment,just (about to), on the verge (of doing or happening),duly, naturally	…no time for humming now. The Planet is nearing imminent death.	……と言ってられる場合じゃないんじゃの。まさに星の死が近づいておる
しゅくはい	祝杯	n	toast, congratulatory cup	I promised my guys someday… when we saved the Planet from the Shinra, that we'd all go to Cosmo Canyon and celebrate…	あいつらと約束してた。いつか……神羅からこの星をすくったその時にはコスモキャニオンへ行って祝杯をあげよう……
せいぎ	正義	n	justice, right, righteousness, correct meaning	I don't care if it's for justice or revenge, or whatever. I don't care…	正義だとか復讐だとかそんなことは他のやつらが勝手に決めりゃいい
たきび	焚き火	n, vs	open-air fire (e.g. for garden refuse), bonfire,open fire (e.g. in a kitchen)	Bonfires are funny, aren't they?	たき火って不思議ね
そぐ	削ぐ	v5g, vt	to chip (off), to shave (off), to slice (off), to sharpen,to dampen (e.g. enthusiasm), to discourage, to weaken, to reduce	What a boring place, just like I thought. I wanna go somewhere! Let's go find some Materia!	予想どおり、たいくつなとこだね～。はやく、どっか行こ！そいで、マテリア探そ！
ろか	濾過	n, vs	filtration, filtering, percolation	I wonder how many years it's been… Gosh, it brings back memories……	こんなん、何年ぶりやろか……な～んや、いろんなこと思いだしますなぁ……
むね	胸	n	chest, breast,breasts, bosom, bust,heart,lungs,stomach,heart, mind, feelings	When I talk about my Mother, I am full of pride and joy…	母さんの話をするとオイラの胸はほこらしい気持ちではちきれそうになる
はちきれる	はち切れる	v1, vi	to be filled to bursting, to burst	When I talk about my Mother, I am full of pride and joy…	母さんの話をするとオイラの胸はほこらしい気持ちではちきれそうになる
みごろし	見殺し	n	letting (someone) die without helping	Of course. He…left Mother for dead.	当たりまえだよ。あいつは……母さんを見殺しにしたんだ
ほうりだす	放り出す	v5s, vt	to throw out,to drop, to toss, to dump,to abandon, to neglect, to leave behind, to give up,to dismiss, to fire, to expel	When the Gi tribe attacked, he ran off by himself, leaving Mother and the people of the Canyon!	ギ族が攻めてきたときあいつは１人で逃げ出した。母さんと谷の人たちを放り出してさ！
だいだい	代々	n-adv, n-t	for generations, hereditary, generation after generation	I wonder what he wants to show him? Hmm, maybe it's Materia that's been passed down for generations?	見せたいものって、アレかな？ホラ、この谷に代々つたわるマテリアとかさ！
としより	年寄り	n	old person, elderly person, senior citizen,trustee of the Japan Sumo Association, [object Object],senior statesman (of the Tokugawa shogunate),important local official (under the Tokugawa Shogunate)	You want an old man like me to go first? I'll be right behind you.	年寄りに先を行かせるのか？わしは後ろからついていくよ
ふういん	封印	vs	seal,to seal (e.g. a letter), to affix a seal, to seal up	Sealed Cave	封印の洞窟
ぼうれい	亡霊	n	ghost, the dead, departed spirits, apparition	Everyone here's a Ghost of the Gi tribe, killed in a certain battle.	ここにいるのはみなギ族の亡霊じゃ。ある戦士に倒された、な
しす	死す	vs-c, vi	to die	The vengeful spirits of the Gi didn't disappear, and couldn't return to the Lifestream…	しかし、死してなおギ族の憎悪の精神は消えず、ライフストリームに帰ることすらこばんでいるのじゃ……
ぞうお	憎悪	n, vs	hatred	The vengeful spirits of the Gi didn't disappear, and couldn't return to the Lifestream…	しかし、死してなおギ族の憎悪の精神は消えず、ライフストリームに帰ることすらこばんでいるのじゃ……
くずす	崩す	v5s, vt	to destroy, to demolish, to pull down, to tear down, to level,to disturb, to put into disorder, to throw off balance, to make shaky,to relax (one's pose), to make oneself at ease,to break (a bill), to change, to make change,to write in cursive style, to write in running style,to break into a smile, to let off a smile,to lower (a price)	Break it open	くずしてみる
そっと		vs	softly, gently, quietly,secretly, stealthily,to leave alone, to leave as it is	Leave it alone	そっとしておく
ざんにん	残忍	adj-na, n	brutal, cruel, merciless, ruthless, cold-blooded	Even though the Gi outnumbered us, they could not attack through here because the passage is too narrow.	ギ族はわしらより体も大きくなにより残忍じゃ。ここから攻め入られたらひとたまりもなかったじゃろう
ブラック		n	black	Received "Black M-phone"!	『ブラックメガホン』を手にいれた！
フェアリー		n	fairy	Received "Fairy Ring"!	『フェアリーリング』を手にいれた！
リング		n	ring	Received "Fairy Ring"!	『フェアリーリング』を手にいれた！
よどむ	淀む	v5m, vi	to stagnate,to settle (at the bottom), to deposit, to be sedimented,to become sluggish, to become dull, to become stale,to be delayed, to hesitate, to falter, to stammer, to stumble	After death… The ghosts of the Gi. Like stagnant air…	死してなお……ギ族の亡霊が……よどんだ大気のように……
にどと	二度と	adv	never again	But he was never able to return to town…	そして自分は二度と村へもどることは
どくや	毒矢	n	poisoned arrow (dart)	Even after the Gi's poisonous arrows turned his body to stone…… Even after they all ran away… Seto, continued to protect us.	ギ族の毒矢で体を石にされても……ギ族がすべて逃げだしたあとも……戦士セトはここを守りつづけた
ひきょう	卑怯	adj-na, n	cowardice, meanness, unfairness	You thought that he was a coward and ran away. But he, alone risked his life to protect Cosmo Canyon.	たとえ、逃げだしたひきょうものと思われても、たった１人、命をかけてコスモキャニオンを守ったんじゃ
しょうじき	正直	adv	honest, frank, candid, straightforward,honestly, frankly	Honestly, I don't think it can be done.	正直なところ、そんなことができるとは、わしには思えん
おもえる	思える	v1	to seem, to appear likely	Honestly, I don't think it can be done.	正直なところ、そんなことができるとは、わしには思えん
めっする	滅する	vs-s, vt	to be destroyed, to perish, to go out (e.g. fire),to destroy, to get rid of, to extinguish	Even if they stop Sephiroth, everything will perish.	セフィロスとやらを倒しても同じこと。かたちあるものは必ず滅す、じゃ
いちいん	一員	n	person, member	I've been thinking if there was anything WE could do, as a part of the Planet, something to help a Planet already in misery…	こんなにも星が苦しんでいるのに星の一員、いや、星の一部であるわしらにできることは本当に何もないのか、とな
はじる	恥じる	v1	to feel ashamed	I'll come back a warrior true to that noble name! So please, Grandpa…	その名にはじない戦士になって帰ってくる！だから、じっちゃん！