つくり	旁	n	right-hand radical of a character	CLOUD, did you make up that story just to get our support?	CLOUDさん同情でもひこ思て、つくり話ですか？
ロス		n	loss,feeling of loss,Los Angeles	The…Great…Se…phi…roth… is…near..."	セフィ……ロス……さま……ちかくに……いる……
たこ	凧	n	kite	You're sick, saying such things…	なにをネボケたこと言ってるんだい！
おととい	一昨日	n-adv, n-t	day before yesterday	Get out of here!	顔あらってからおとといおいで！
かいす	介す	v5s, vs-c, vt	to use as an intermediary, to mediate, to assist,to worry, to mind, to care	Oh, really. Then, it'll help me too.	そうかいそうかい。そりゃぁ、私も助かるよ
はじく	弾く	v5k, vt	to flip, to snap, to flick,to repel,to use (an abacus), to calculate,to strum, to pluck the strings (of a guitar, etc.)	CLOUD… CLOUD was playing.	CLOUD……CLOUDが弾いてた
ピアノ		n	piano	TIFA's secret savings, 1 gil came out of the keyboard.	ピアノのけんばんの間からTIFAのへそくり１ギルがでてきた
はん	版	ctr	edition, version, printing, impression, implementation (e.g. software),plate, block, cast,editions of a publication	TIFA's secret savings, 1 gil came out of the keyboard.	ピアノのけんばんの間からTIFAのへそくり１ギルがでてきた
メロディー		n	melody,chime	I've heard this melody somewhere before. I played it well.	どこかで聞いたメロディ。なんとなくうまく弾けた……
はじける	弾ける	v1, vi	to burst open, to split open, to pop,to be bursting with (e.g. youth, laughter, flavor),to bounce, to bound	I've heard this melody somewhere before. I played it well.	どこかで聞いたメロディ。なんとなくうまく弾けた……
きょく	曲	n	composition, piece of music, song, track (on a record),tune, melody, air,enjoyment, fun, interest, pleasure	I have the sheet music for that song.	その曲なら、がくふがあるわ
およぶ	及ぶ	v5b, vi	to reach, to amount to, to befall, to happen to, to extend,to be up to the task, to come up to,to compare with, to be a match (for),to commit (a crime),to require (to do)	TIFA, what's happened to our town? Was it all an illusion, or just a dream? No, it was neither. I remember trying to get people out of the flames, but not having the strength… Burning with anger, I went to the reactor to kill Sephiroth.	TIFAよこの村はいったいどうなっているのだ？あれは幻、それとも夢だったのか？いや、そんなはずはない。私ははっきりと覚えている。炎の中から無事な者を救いだそうとしたが力およばず……怒りに燃えた私はセフィロスを倒すべく魔晄炉へ向かった。
しき	指揮	n, vs, adj-no	command, direction	I recall a scientist named Hojo was in charge. He ordered the troops to gather up everyone still alive for the experiment. I didn't know what type of experiment he was talking about, but I wasn't about to let them have my dearest student.	指揮をとっていたのは、たしか宝条という科学者だったと記憶している。宝条は【少しでも息のある者は実験用に集めておけ】と兵士たちに命令していた。何の実験だか知らないが、かわいい弟子を渡すわけにはいかない。
あずける	預ける	v1, vt	to leave (in someone's keeping), to put (in someone's care), to place (in someone's custody), to entrust (someone) with, to deposit,to put (someone) in charge of, to leave (a matter) in someone's hands, to let (someone) decide,to lean on, to put one's weight on	I decided to go to Midgar to find a doctor I could trust. I'm worried about you, but I can't settle down in one place for very long.	ミッドガルの信頼できる医者におまえをあずけて私は再び旅に出ることにした。おまえのことは心配だったがひとつ場所にとどまっていられないのが私の性分だ。
ふたたび	再び	adv	again, once more, a second time	I decided to go to Midgar to find a doctor I could trust. I'm worried about you, but I can't settle down in one place for very long.	ミッドガルの信頼できる医者におまえをあずけて私は再び旅に出ることにした。おまえのことは心配だったがひとつ場所にとどまっていられないのが私の性分だ。
とどまる	止まる	v5r, vi	to remain, to abide, to stay (in the one place),to be limited to, to be confined to	I decided to go to Midgar to find a doctor I could trust. I'm worried about you, but I can't settle down in one place for very long.	ミッドガルの信頼できる医者におまえをあずけて私は再び旅に出ることにした。おまえのことは心配だったがひとつ場所にとどまっていられないのが私の性分だ。
しょうぶん	性分	n	nature, disposition	I decided to go to Midgar to find a doctor I could trust. I'm worried about you, but I can't settle down in one place for very long.	ミッドガルの信頼できる医者におまえをあずけて私は再び旅に出ることにした。おまえのことは心配だったがひとつ場所にとどまっていられないのが私の性分だ。
きず	傷	n	wound, injury, cut, gash, bruise, scratch, scrape, scar,chip, crack, scratch, nick,flaw, defect, weakness, weak point,stain (on one's reputation), disgrace, dishonor, dishonour,(emotional) hurt, hurt feelings	Have you recovered fully? Are you well?	傷はすっかり良くなっただろうか？元気にしているだろうか？
ふらり		adv, adv-to	aimlessly, unexpectedly (showing up),slowly swaying, staggering, moving feebly	I wonder how many years have passed since then? I just got into town again, but I can't believe it… The whole town is back to normal, except for the strange people with black clothes all around.	あれから、何年がすぎたのだ？私はふらりとこの村に戻ってきたが正直なところ、おどろいている。村は元通りだが、黒い服の不気味な者たちがうろついている……。
もとどおり	元通り	adj-na, n-t	as before, as ever	I wonder how many years have passed since then? I just got into town again, but I can't believe it… The whole town is back to normal, except for the strange people with black clothes all around.	あれから、何年がすぎたのだ？私はふらりとこの村に戻ってきたが正直なところ、おどろいている。村は元通りだが、黒い服の不気味な者たちがうろついている……。
プンプン		adv, adv-to, vs	(smelling) strongly, pungently,furiously, indignantly, fuming, in a huff	The town reeks of Shinra, but I won't go after them. You may think I'm running from them, but it's just that I don't want anything to do with Shinra anymore. Feels like time is running out.	神羅のにおいがぷんぷんするが私は深追いするつもりはない。逃げていると言われればそれまでだが神羅にかかわるのは、もういやなのだ。さて、TIFA。この家の者が戻って来ないうちにここを立ち去らなくてはならない。時間はなさそうだ。
ふかおい	深追い	n, vs	chasing too far, pursuing relentlessly	The town reeks of Shinra, but I won't go after them. You may think I'm running from them, but it's just that I don't want anything to do with Shinra anymore. Feels like time is running out.	神羅のにおいがぷんぷんするが私は深追いするつもりはない。逃げていると言われればそれまでだが神羅にかかわるのは、もういやなのだ。さて、TIFA。この家の者が戻って来ないうちにここを立ち去らなくてはならない。時間はなさそうだ。
おいる	老いる	v1, vi	to age, to grow old	I want to give it to you myself, but it's hard for my students to see me as an old man. I can't even jump anymore. But I hope you continue to sharpen your skills and remember what I taught you.	直接渡したいところだが弟子に老いた自分を見られるのはつらい。もう私はジャンプさえ出来なくなってしまった。私の技、おまえがみがきあげてくれることをねがっている。
おうぎ	奥義	n	secret techniques, inner mysteries, esoterica, hidden purpose, quintessence (of art, skill)	Tifa's Final Mystery?	TIFAの最終奥義
ギンギン		adv	ecstatic, ecstatically,splitting headache	Yeah, I jammed on it	ギンギンに弾いた
らい	来	suf	next (year, etc.),since (last month, etc.)	I can read sheet music too, you know. Ummm, let's see…	俺だって、がくふくらい読め…… えっと……
コピー		n, vs	copy, photocopy,blurb on a book jacket,catch copy	1  Clone Activity Report	１　コピー行動記録
こんき	今期	n-adv, n-t	the present term	Unfortunately, no 'CLONES' have left this town this quarter. As previously reported, the 'CLONES 'seem to be sensing something.	残念ながら今期も村を出て行った【コピー】はいません。すでに報告させていただいたとおり【コピー】たちは確かに何かを感じてはいるようです。
きみつ	機密	n	secrecy, highly classified information	2  Confidentiality Report	２　機密保持関係報告
ほじ	保持	n, vs	retention, maintenance, preservation	2  Confidentiality Report	２　機密保持関係報告
さいわい	幸い	adv	happiness, blessedness, luck, fortune, felicity,luckily, fortunately	Fortunately, none knew about the incident five years ago.	さいわい、今期も、５年前の事件を 知っている者はいませんでした。
たてこむ	立て込む	v5m, vi	to be crowded (with), to be packed,to be piled up (of work), to be busy (with)	Oh, I'm so sorry. I've got lots to do…	あ、すいません。ちょっと仕事がたてこんでますので……
ボイラー		n	boiler	I'm checking the Mako boiler. Please don't bother me now.	魔晄ボイラーの調子が見てるんです。ジャマしないでくださいよ
しゅうまつ	終末	n, adj-no	an end, a close	Finished, finito, over!! Even as we speak Meteor… This is the end!	終わり終わり終わり！！ああ、こうしてる間にもメテオが～！　終末が～！！
きざむ	刻む	v5m, vt	to mince, to cut fine, to chop up, to hash, to shred,to carve, to engrave, to chisel, to notch,to tick away (time), to beat out (e.g. rhythm), to record the passing moments,to etch (into one's mind), to remember distinctly,to have tattooed,to torment	Something is written on the back of the lid.	ふたのウラに文字がきざまれている
ゆか	床	n	floor,stage (for the narrator and the shamisen player),dining platform built across a river	Something is written on the floor.	ゆかに文字がきざまれている
きんこ	金庫	n	safe, strongbox, cashbox, vault, strongroom,depository, cash office, treasury, provider of funds	Open the safe	それでも金庫をあける
めもり	目盛り	n	gradations (on a ruler, thermometer, etc.), division, scale	[Empty Entry]	メモリ
ビーカ		n	beaker	A scratch left by a fingernail inside the beaker… Let's get out of here…'.	ビーカーの内がわにツメでキズつけたあとが……『ここから逃げよう……』
わに	鰐	n, adj-no	crocodile, alligator, crocodilian,shark	A scratch left by a fingernail inside the beaker… Let's get out of here…'.	ビーカーの内がわにツメでキズつけたあとが……『ここから逃げよう……』
とうぼう	逃亡	n, vs	escape, flight, running away, elopement, fleeing	Escapee Report no. 1 X Month X Day Two escapees were located near Midgar.	逃亡者に関する報告書　１ Ｘ月Ｘ日 当施設から逃亡した２名を ミッドガル近辺で発見しました]
つき	月	n-t	moon,month	Escapee Report no. 1 X Month X Day Two escapees were located near Midgar.	逃亡者に関する報告書　１ Ｘ月Ｘ日 当施設から逃亡した２名を ミッドガル近辺で発見しました]
きんぺん	近辺	n	neighbourhood, neighborhood, vicinity	Escapee Report no. 1 X Month X Day Two escapees were located near Midgar.	逃亡者に関する報告書　１ Ｘ月Ｘ日 当施設から逃亡した２名を ミッドガル近辺で発見しました]
しょうしゃ	照射	n, vs	irradiation, radiation, beaming,exposure (to light), illumination	A  Former member of SOLDIER/Number(   ) No effect could be detected from either Mako Radiation Therapy or Jenova on him.	Ａ　元ソルジャー／ナンバー【無】 魔晄照射およびジェノバの影響は 見受けられませんでした。 
みうける	見受ける	v1, vt	to catch sight of, to see, to suppose, to assume from appearances	A  Former member of SOLDIER/Number(   ) No effect could be detected from either Mako Radiation Therapy or Jenova on him.	Ａ　元ソルジャー／ナンバー【無】 魔晄照射およびジェノバの影響は 見受けられませんでした。 
かた	過多	n, adj-na	excess, surplus, superabundance	B  Regular/Number (   ) Reaction to Jenova detected.	Ｂ　一般／ナンバー【無】ジェノバへの反応過多が見受けられました
しょぶん	処分	n, vs	disposal, throwing away, selling off,dealing with (a problem), measure,punishment, penalty,putting down (e.g. diseased animal)	Escapee Report no. 3 Status.	逃亡者に関する報告書　３：処分に関して
しゃさつ	射殺	n, vs	shooting to death	A  Shot for resisting.	Ａ　抵抗したため、射殺。
しんこう	進行	n	moving forward (e.g. vehicle), onward movement,advance (work, procedure, etc), advancement, progress,progress (of a disease), disease progression,progression (harmonic, melodic)	B's whereabouts is currently unknown. But pursuit is unnecessary due to his diminishing consciousness. Awaiting further instructions.	現在、Ｂの行方は不明です。しかし、Ｂは意識の乱れがかなり進行している様子でしたのでこのまま放置しておいても間題は無いというのが我々の見解です。今後に関する指示をおねがいします
ほうち	放置	n, vs	leaving as is, leaving alone, leaving to chance, neglecting, abandoning	B's whereabouts is currently unknown. But pursuit is unnecessary due to his diminishing consciousness. Awaiting further instructions.	現在、Ｂの行方は不明です。しかし、Ｂは意識の乱れがかなり進行している様子でしたのでこのまま放置しておいても間題は無いというのが我々の見解です。今後に関する指示をおねがいします
けんかい	見解	n	opinion, point of view	B's whereabouts is currently unknown. But pursuit is unnecessary due to his diminishing consciousness. Awaiting further instructions.	現在、Ｂの行方は不明です。しかし、Ｂは意識の乱れがかなり進行している様子でしたのでこのまま放置しておいても間題は無いというのが我々の見解です。今後に関する指示をおねがいします
やく	厄	n	misfortune, bad luck, evil, disaster	Jenova will be at the Reunion. Jenova will join the Reunion, becoming a calamity from the skies.	ジェノバはリユニオンするものだ。ジェノバはリユニオンして空から来た厄災となる
じかく	自覚	n, vs	self-consciousness, self-awareness	I will go North past Mt. Nibel. If you wish to know…then follow…	わたしは【ニブル山をこえて北】へいく。もしお前が自覚するならば……わたしを追ってくるがよい
とりのぞく	取り除く	v5k, vt	to remove, to deinstall, to take away, to set apart	I must get rid of all those that stand in the way of my research. Even that one from the Turks.	私の研究の邪魔をする者を全て取り除かなければならない。タークスのあの男も例外ではない
せいたい	生体	n, adj-no	organism, living body	I scientifically altered him and put him to sleep in the basement. If you want to find him, search the area.	私はタークスの男に生体学的な改造をほどこし、地下に眠らせた。もし興味があるなら探してみるがよい
かいぞう	改造	n, vs	remodeling, remodelling, restructuring, reconstruction, reshuffling (e.g. cabinet),modding	I scientifically altered him and put him to sleep in the basement. If you want to find him, search the area.	私はタークスの男に生体学的な改造をほどこし、地下に眠らせた。もし興味があるなら探してみるがよい
ほどこす	施す	v5s, vt	to give (time, money, goods), to donate,to do, to perform, to conduct,to apply (processing, makeup, etc.), to add (e.g. ornamentation, annotation),to sow, to seed, to scatter (e.g. fertilizer), to sprinkle,to spread far and wide	I scientifically altered him and put him to sleep in the basement. If you want to find him, search the area.	私はタークスの男に生体学的な改造をほどこし、地下に眠らせた。もし興味があるなら探してみるがよい
あくまで	飽くまで	adv	to the end, to the bitter end, to the last, stubbornly, persistently, consistently, to the utmost,after all, it must be remembered, only, purely, simply	But…this is merely a game I thought of. It is not necessary for you to participate if you don't want to.	ただし……これはあくまで私がきまぐれでおもいついたゲームにすぎない。むりにつきあってくれる必要はない
きまぐれ	気まぐれ	adj-na, n	whim, caprice, whimsy, fickle, moody, uneven temper	But…this is merely a game I thought of. It is not necessary for you to participate if you don't want to.	ただし……これはあくまで私がきまぐれでおもいついたゲームにすぎない。むりにつきあってくれる必要はない
ようし	用紙	n	blank form,sheets of paper, sheet of paper	Read it	もう１まいの用紙をみる
ダイヤル		n, vs	dial (e.g. telephone, radio, clock, gauge)	Move the dial on the safe carefully but quickly. You have 20 seconds. You can not go past the numbers while turning. The 4 hints for the numbers are…	金庫のダイヤルはしんちょうにかつ、すばやくまわす。２０秒以内だ。少しでも行き過ぎてはいけない。４つのダイヤルのヒントは……
いない	以内	n, n-suf	within, inside of, less than	Move the dial on the safe carefully but quickly. You have 20 seconds. You can not go past the numbers while turning. The 4 hints for the numbers are…	金庫のダイヤルはしんちょうにかつ、すばやくまわす。２０秒以内だ。少しでも行き過ぎてはいけない。４つのダイヤルのヒントは……
いきすぎる	行き過ぎる	v1, vi	to go too far, to go past,to go to extremes, to overdo it	Move the dial on the safe carefully but quickly. You have 20 seconds. You can not go past the numbers while turning. The 4 hints for the numbers are…	金庫のダイヤルはしんちょうにかつ、すばやくまわす。２０秒以内だ。少しでも行き過ぎてはいけない。４つのダイヤルのヒントは……
さんそ	酸素	n, adj-no	oxygen (O)	The lid of the box with the most oxygen.	酸素が一番多いハコのふた
はこ	箱	suf, ctr	box, case, chest, package, pack, crate,car (of a train, etc.),shamisen case, shamisen,public building, community building,man who carries a geisha's shamisen,receptacle for human waste, feces (faeces),counter for boxes (or boxed objects)	The lid of the box with the most oxygen.	酸素が一番多いハコのふた
きしむ	軋む	v5m, vi	to jar, to creak, to grate	The creek in the floor near the chair on the second floor… then to the left five steps, up nine steps, left two steps, and up six steps.	２階のイスのそばのユカのきしみ……そこから左５歩、上９歩、左２歩、上６歩
あぶりだす	あぶり出す	v5s, vt	to bring into the open, to reveal, to uncover (e.g. evidence), to bring to light	The fourth row has been written in invisible ink…	４行目があぶりだされた……