あくむ	悪夢	n	nightmare, bad dream	…To wake me from the nightmare	……私を悪夢から呼び起こすのは
うなされる	魘される	v1, vi	to have a nightmare,to make a noise during a nightmare	You were having a nightmare.	ずいぶんうなされていたようだな
かおいろ	顔色	n	complexion, one's colour, one's color,countenance, expression, one's face	…You don't look good.	……顔色、悪いよ
はじまり	始まり	n	origin, beginning	This mansion is the beginning of your nightmare.	この屋敷は悪夢の始まりの場所だ
しゅっしょう	出生	n, vs, adj-no	birth	So Sephiroth knows he was created five years ago? And about the Jenova Project?	セフィロスは５年前に自分の出生の秘密を知ったのだな？ジェノバ・プロジェクトのことを？
せいさくしょ	製作所	n	works, factory, plant	I was with…Shinra Manufacturing in Administrative Research, also known as--the Turks.	私は……元神羅製作所総務部調査課通称タークスの……
そうむ	総務	n	general affairs, general business, manager, director, adjutant general	I was with…Shinra Manufacturing in Administrative Research, also known as--the Turks.	私は……元神羅製作所総務部調査課通称タークスの……
つうしょう	通称	n	popular name, common name, nickname, alias	I was with…Shinra Manufacturing in Administrative Research, also known as--the Turks.	私は……元神羅製作所総務部調査課通称タークスの……
チーム		n	team	She was an assistant to Professor Gast of the Jenova Project. Beautiful…Lucrecia.	ジェノバ・プロジェクトチームの責任者ガスト博士の助手。美しい……ルクレツィア
じょしゅ	助手	n	assistant, helper,assistant (to a professor)	She was an assistant to Professor Gast of the Jenova Project. Beautiful…Lucrecia.	ジェノバ・プロジェクトチームの責任者ガスト博士の助手。美しい……ルクレツィア
じんたい	人体	n	human body	…A human experiment?	…………人体実験？
ちゅうし	中止	n, vs	suspension, stoppage, discontinuance, interruption	There was no way to cancel the experiment.	実験を中止させることができなかった
おもいとどまる	思いとどまる	v5r, vt	to give up (a plan or idea), to desist from (doing)	I couldn't stop her.	彼女に思いとどまらせることができなかった
おかす	犯す	v5s, vt	to commit (e.g. crime), to perpetrate, to make (e.g. mistake),to break (e.g. rule), to violate, to transgress, to contravene,to rape, to violate, to ravish, to deflower	That was my sin.	それが私が犯した罪だ
けいする	敬する	vs-s, vt	to respect	I let the one I loved, the one I respected most, face the worst.	愛する、いや、そんけいする女性を恐ろしいめにあわせてしまった
ねとる	寝とる	v5r, vt	to steal another's spouse, to steal another's lover	You think that's punishing yourself? You're just sleeping.	そんなんでつぐないのつもりかいな？ねとるだけやないか
いずれ	何れ	pn	where, which, who,anyway, anyhow, at any rate,sooner or later, eventually, one of these days, at some future date or time,both, either, any, all, whichever	Dunno. But we're after him and Sephiroth. So, I guess sooner or later…	さあな。でもヤツもセフィロスを追っているとなれば、いずれは……
でくわす	出くわす	v5s, vi	to happen to meet, to come across	Hmm, I don't know. But we're going after Hojo and Sephiroth. So, we might……	さあ、どうかしら。でも宝条もセフィロスを追っているわ。だから、いつかは出くわすことに……
がわり	代わり	suf	substitute for ...	That sure was a quick change of heart.	ずいぶん急な心がわり、ね？
どなる	怒鳴る	v5r, vi	to shout (in anger), to yell	What?	どないやねん
ごういん	強引	adj-na, n	overbearing, coercive, pushy, forcible, high-handed	Hey, hold on sleepy. You're pretty damn pushy!	オイオイ、強引だぜ！
なにかと	何かと	adv	one way or another	Being a former Turk, I may be of help…	元タークスと言うことで何かと力にもなれると思うが……