しきる	仕切る	v5r, vt	to partition, to divide, to mark off, to itemize,to direct, to take control, to manage, to take responsibility,to settle accounts,to toe the mark	Better ask the Captain about this town. He's the one in charge of it.	この村のことなら艇長に聞いてくれ。ここを仕切ってるのはアイツだからな
パイロット		n	pilot	The Captain was a pilot when Shinra was still interested in their Space Program.	艇長は神羅カンパニーがまだ宇宙開発に手を出していたころのパイロットさ
さむらい	侍	n	warrior (esp. of military retainers of daimyos in the Edo period), samurai,man in attendance (on a person of high standing), retainer	He was going to be the world's first astronaut, but there was an accident…	世界初の宇宙飛行士になる予定だったのだがま、ちょっとした事故があってな
きち	基地	n	base (military, expedition, etc.)	This used to be a Shinra base where they used to launch rockets.	ここは元々神羅のロケット打ち上げ基地だったのじゃ
かたむく	傾く	v5k, vi	to incline toward, to slant, to lurch, to heel over, to be disposed to, to trend toward, to be prone to,to go down (sun), to wane, to sink, to decline	You saw the leaning rocket, right? That's Shinra No. 26. It never got off the ground though.	かたむいたロケットを見たじゃろ？あれが神羅２６号じゃ。一度も飛んだことはないんじゃが
ごう	号	suf	number, edition, make, model, issue, part of that group,sobriquet, pen-name,suffix attached to names of ships, trains, airplanes, etc.	You saw the leaning rocket, right? That's Shinra No. 26. It never got off the ground though.	かたむいたロケットを見たじゃろ？あれが神羅２６号じゃ。一度も飛んだことはないんじゃが
メカニック		adj-na, n	mechanic	Everyone in this town was a mechanic back when they were planning to launch the rocket.	ここの住人はみんなロケット打ち上げ計画のときのメカニック仲間なんだ
しゅどう	主導	n, vs	leadership, initiative, spearhead	There was a plan to send a man into outer space. It was headed up by the leader of the Shinra Space Program, Palmer.	神羅の宇宙開発部門の長であるパルマーの主導で、人間を宇宙におくろうとした計画があったのさ
なごり	名残	n	remains, traces, vestiges, relics,(the sorrow of) parting,end	This town is the result of the plan, but the plan got cut…	でも、その計画も中断しちゃってね……この村は、その計画のなごりなのさ
シャンハイ	上海	n	Shanghai (China)	Welcome to the Shanghai Inn!	上海亭に、ようこそっす！
てい	亭	suf	arbor, arbour, bower, pavilion,suffix forming the final part of the pseudonyms of some writers and performers,suffix forming the final part of the name of a restaurant	Welcome to the Shanghai Inn!	上海亭に、ようこそっす！
だいちょう	台帳	n	account book, ledger, register	Excuse me. Please don't come in here. Our books and the room keys are in here, so I'll have to ask you to please stay out.	お客さん、困るっすよ。こっちには台帳や部屋の鍵とかが置いてあるんで、入ってこないでほしいんすけど
じゅうあつ	重圧	n	strong pressure, heavy pressure	If he keeps up like that, he's gonna collapse someday. Y'know what I mean? I'm talkin' heart attack.	そんなふうに心の余裕がないのではいつか倒れてしまいますよ。心の重圧にたえかねて、ね
やすらぎ	安らぎ	n, adj-no	peace (of mind), tranquility, tranquillity, serenity	A drink will ease your heart…	１杯の酒はこころの安らぎ……
さび	錆	n	rust	A rusty old rocket… Wonder why they made something so huge?	サビついたロケット……何のために、こんな巨大なものが……？
そびえる	聳える	v1, vi	to rise, to tower, to soar	It just looms there. That's how the town got its name… Shinra No. 26'.	あすこにそびえるがこの村の名前の由来宇宙ロケット『神羅２６号』じゃ
ゆらい	由来	n, vs, adv	origin, source, history, derivation, reason, destiny	It just looms there. That's how the town got its name… Shinra No. 26'.	あすこにそびえるがこの村の名前の由来宇宙ロケット『神羅２６号』じゃ
いちにちじゅう	一日中	n, n-adv	all day long, all the day, throughout the day	All gramps does is gaze at that rocket all day long.	ウチのじいさんったら一日中ロケットばかりながめておるのぉ
げんか	原価	n	cost price	How 'bout it? Want to look at the rocket with me?	どうじゃ、あんた？わしと一練にロケット見上げんか？
ろうじん	老人	n	old person, senior citizen, the aged, the elderly	But I just can't stop it. Just call it an old man's folly if you will.	しかし、あきらめきれんのじゃよ。老人のグチと思うて笑ろうてくれ
わら	ｗ	n	LOL, haha	But I just can't stop it. Just call it an old man's folly if you will.	しかし、あきらめきれんのじゃよ。老人のグチと思うて笑ろうてくれ
そういん	総員	n	the entire strength, all hands, all the members	Don't let them get any further! Everyone, ATTACK---!	ここより一歩も進ませるな！総員、突撃ィ～～！
とつげき	突撃	n, vs	assault, charge, attack	Don't let them get any further! Everyone, ATTACK---!	ここより一歩も進ませるな！総員、突撃ィ～～！
スペクタクル		n	spectacle	Mmm, a SPECTACLE.	ん～、スペクタクル～
たたきだす	叩き出す	v5s, vt	to begin to strike,to kick out, to forcefully expel, to fire (someone),to hammer (pattern, etc.) into metal	I'm outta here, CLOUD! I'm gonna kick those $^%$# Shinra right out of my rocket!	行くぜ、CLOUD！神羅のクソッタレ野郎どもをオレ様のロケットから、たたきだしてやる！
アクション		n	action	Mmm, here comes some hard action!	ん～、ハードアクション～
くむ	組む	v5m	to cross (legs or arms), to link (arms),to put together, to construct, to assemble, to produce (e.g. TV program),to braid, to plait,to grapple, to wrestle,to unite, to join, to link up, to form an alliance,to set (e.g. type),to issue (e.g. money order)	Oh, it's you? I heard you and the Captain really made a BANG!	ああ、あんたたちか。艇長と組んで、ハデにやったようだね
かんかん	寛緩	adv, adj-t	looking cool and collect, with an air of perfect composure	I also heard that Rufus was so pissed off he went on a rampage and that no one's been able to get near him!	あの後、ルーファウスはカンカンで手がつけられなかったそうだよ。ふふふ、久々にスッとしたよ
ひさびさ	久々	adj-na, adj-no, adv, n	(in a) long time, long time (ago), while (ago), long ago, long while (ago), (in a) long while	I also heard that Rufus was so pissed off he went on a rampage and that no one's been able to get near him!	あの後、ルーファウスはカンカンで手がつけられなかったそうだよ。ふふふ、久々にスッとしたよ
ひそか	密か	adj-na, n	secret, private, surreptitious	That sucks. I was secretly eyeing that thing. Broke, huh? What a drag.	困っちゃうなぁ。ひそかに僕が狙っていたのになぁ。壊れちゃったのかぁ。残念
おしこめる	押し込める	v1, vt	to shut up, to imprison	Because those Shinra creeps locked us up in our houses, we couldn't even watch the rocket lift off.	この前、神羅のヤツらが来たときにわしらを家におしこめてくれたおかげであの日はロケットを見上げられなかったわい
スポーツカー		n	sports car	Mmm. You know that Shinra sports car at CID's house? It might be fun to try and restore that thing…	う～む。CIDの家にある神羅のスポーツカー……あいつをレストアしてみるのもおもしろいかもしれんな……
ストア		n	store, shop,stoa (classical Greek colonnade or portico),store,Stoic	Mmm. You know that Shinra sports car at CID's house? It might be fun to try and restore that thing…	う～む。CIDの家にある神羅のスポーツカー……あいつをレストアしてみるのもおもしろいかもしれんな……
むかい	向い	n, adj-no	facing, opposite, across the street, other side	How long's that guy gonna be in the bathroom? I need to go, too…	向かいの席にすわっていたヤツいつまでトイレに入っているのかな？オレも使いたいのによぉ……
ひきつれる	引き連れる	v1, vt	to take someone along, to be accompanied (by)	Seems like Palmer of Shinra, Inc. ordered soldiers to restore the rocket…	神羅のパルマーさんが兵士を引き連れてロケットを整備しているようですが……
いちだい	一大	n	one large ..., a great ...	Now that one of Shinra's greatest events is over, I guess it's back to the same old boring life again…	神羅の一大イベントも終わってしまったしまた、つまらない毎日が始まるのね……
こっとう	骨董	n	antique, curio	There're tons of what look	こっとう品と言ってもいいような
オーナー		n	owner	…I bet the owner of this store	……きっと、この店のオーナーは
マニア		n	enthusiast,mania, enthusiasm	was a real gun fanatic.	かなりのガンマニアなのだろう。
かんがえつく	考えつく	v5k, vt	to think of, to come up with	Hey CID! I just thought of the best joke! Listen to this one.	おっ、CID！ついに究極のシャレを考えついたんだ！ぜひ聞いてくれよ
だじゃれ	駄洒落	n	feeble joke, bad pun	I'm so sick of hearing these dumb puns, but okay…let's get it over with. Go on…let me hear it.	おまえのダジャレは聞きあきたがしかたないから聞いてやる。ホレ、言ってみろ
ブランケット		n	blanket	'Raunchy meat, a pocket full, at the cafeteria'. Uh, I mean… Launch a beat up rocket full of Materia'.	『あんたのブランケットにまったりとしたハム』じゃなくてあんたのボロロケットにマテリアボムを積んで打ち上げるつもりらしいぜ
まったり		adv, adv-to, vs	rich (taste), full-bodied (flavour, flavor), mellow(ness),laid-back (lifestyle), relaxed, comfortable	'Raunchy meat, a pocket full, at the cafeteria'. Uh, I mean… Launch a beat up rocket full of Materia'.	『あんたのブランケットにまったりとしたハム』じゃなくてあんたのボロロケットにマテリアボムを積んで打ち上げるつもりらしいぜ
ハム		n	ham (cured pig meat),ham (amateur radio enthusiast),hum	'Raunchy meat, a pocket full, at the cafeteria'. Uh, I mean… Launch a beat up rocket full of Materia'.	『あんたのブランケットにまったりとしたハム』じゃなくてあんたのボロロケットにマテリアボムを積んで打ち上げるつもりらしいぜ
ていちょう	低調	adj-na, n	inactive, slow, sluggish, slack, low tone, undertone, dullness, (market) weakness	Oh, 'crap-again'(oh, captain).	いやいやそんなていちょう（艇長）にほめるなよ～
やらかす	遣らかす	v5s, vt	to fail, to blunder, to make a mess, to perpetrate, to do,to drink up, to eat up	Looks like that *&%$#^$ Rufus wants to use my rocket for somethin'.	ルーファウスのボンボン野郎がオレさまのロケットを使って何かやらかすつもりらしいな
おそる	恐る	v2r-k, v4r, v2r-s, vi	to fear, to be afraid	(A fearful sense of humor…)	（お、恐るべしギャグセンス……）
ギャグ		n	joke, gag	(A fearful sense of humor…)	（お、恐るべしギャグセンス……）
キック		n, vs	kick	Ugh… Nice kick.	ぐぅ……ナイスキック
しょうじん	精進	n, vs	concentration, diligence, devotion,asceticism, zeal in one's quest for enlightenment,adherence to a vegetarian diet	I got to learn more… Devotion, devotion.	もっと、修行せねば……精進、精進
えら	鰓	n	gills, branchia,angle of the mandible, gonial angle	^%$#! Shera. What are you, blind!?	ケッ！　シエラよう。どうしてテメエはそんなにどんくせえんだよ！
ちゃ	茶	n, adj-na	tea,tea plant (Camellia sinensis),tea preparation, making tea,brown,mockery	We got guests!! GET SOME TEA! ^%$#!	客が来たら茶くらい出せよな、このウスノロ！
たく	炊く	v5k, vt	to cook (grains, e.g. rice),to boil, to simmer, to stew, to seethe	Sheesh!! What bad manners!	むっか～～！！たいど、悪いわよ
きつね	狐	n	fox (esp. the red fox, Vulpes vulpes),fox (i.e. a sly person),soba or udon topped with deep-fried tofu,light brown, golden brown	Man, he sure seems wound up tight.	なんや、ごっつうキツい人やなぁ～
うらにわ	裏庭	n	rear garden, back yard	Shera! I'll be in the backyard tunin' up Tiny Bronco!	おい、シエラ！オレ様はタイニー・ブロンコを整備しに裏庭に行ってるからな！
えな	胞衣	n	afterbirth, placenta	He always like this? That's pretty bad!	いつもだって？そりゃ、ひでえな！
ぶんなぐる	ぶん殴る	v5r, vt	to knock, to hit hard, to give a hard blow, to wallop, to sock	What's his prob!? I'm gonna go clean that guy's clock!!	なんだよ、それ！？アタシならぶんなぐってやるよ！
しゅくしょう	縮小	n, vs, adj-no	reduction, curtailment	After that, the Space Program was cut back and the launch was canceled.	それ以後、宇宙計画縮小が決まってロケット発射は中止になりました
ふとっちょ	太っちょ	n	fat person	Well, if it ain't fat man, Palmer. How long were you figurin' on keepin' me waitin'!?	よう、ふとっちょパルマー。待ってたぜ！
おちゃ	お茶	n	tea (usu. green),tea break (at work),tea ceremony	Hey-hey! Tea!	うひょ！　お茶だ！
さとう	砂糖	n	sugar	Can I have some too? With lotsa sugar and honey and… oh yeah, don't forget the lard!	わしにもちょうだい。サトウとハチミツたっぷりでラードも入れてね
ラード		n	lard	Can I have some too? With lotsa sugar and honey and… oh yeah, don't forget the lard!	わしにもちょうだい。サトウとハチミツたっぷりでラードも入れてね
どっさり		adv, adv-to	heaps, a lot, plenty,with a thud	With plenty of sugar and honey. Oh yeah, and don't forget the lard, too.	サトウとハチミツたっぷりでラードもどっさり入れてね。うひょひょ！
けんとう	見当	n-suf	estimate, guess, conjecture, aim,direction, bearings,registration mark (printing),approximately, about, around	We're going after Sephiroth. But seems like we've been going in the wrong direction.	我々はセフィロスを追っている。ただ、どうやら今まで見当違いの方向を探していたようだ
ゆくさき	行く先	n	destination,whereabouts,future, prospects	But now, we think we know where he's headed. But, we have to cross the ocean. That's why we want your plane…	だが今はだいたい行く先がつかめてきたのでな。我々は海を越えなくてはならないんだ。それでお前の飛行機を……
なんの	何の	adj-f	what kind, what sort	What d'ya want?	で、なんの用でい？
ぎじゅつ	技術	n	technology, engineering,technique, skill,art, craft	You know Shinra developed a lot of technological gadgets during the meaningless war, right?	長くてくだらない戦争中に神羅カンパニーがいろんな技術を開発したのは知ってんだろ？
つぎこむ	注ぎ込む	v5m, vt	to invest in, to sink money into, to put into, to lay out (funds), to inject, to impregnate, to infuse, to instill, to implant, to imbue, to focus (attention, efforts)	They put a major budget into it and made prototype after prototype! Finally, they completed Shinra No. 26.	予算もバカスカつぎこんで試作、試作、また試作！で、完成したのが、この神羅２６号
せかいいち	世界一	n-adv, n-t	best in the world	They chose the best pilot in Shinra… no, in the world--me. I mean, come on.	パイロットには神羅一、いや世界一のウデを持つオレ様が選ばれた。ま、当然と言えば当然だわな
いよいよ	愈	adv	more and more, all the more, increasingly,at last, finally, beyond doubt,(at the) last moment, worst possible time	And finally we get to the day of the launch. Everything was goin' well…	いよいよ迎えた打ち上げの日。何もかも上手くいってた
はう	這う	v5u, vi	to creep, to crawl	But, because of that dumb-ass Shera, the launch got messed up. That's why they became so anal!	ところがあのノロマのシエラのせいで打ち上げはおじゃん。それがケチのつきはじめよ
みむく	見向く	v5k, vi	to look around, to look towards (us)	Then, it was all over once they found out Mako energy was profitable. They didn't even so much as look at space exploration.	魔晄エネルギーが金になるとわかったらもう終わりだ。宇宙計画なんて誰も見向きもしねえ
そろばん	算盤	n	abacus	Money, moola, dinero! My dream was just a financial number for them!	かね、金、カネだぁ？オレ様の夢をソロバンかんじょうだけでぼうにふるない！
ひにち	日日	n	the number of days, date	Everyday, it tilts a little bit more.	いまじゃ、毎日にちょこっとずつかたむいてらあ
ちぬる	血塗る	v5r, vi	to smear with blood, to kill	At this rate, I don't know which'll be first, this thing falling over or me gettin' outta here.	このぶんだとコイツが倒れるのが先かオレ様がおっちぬのが先かってくらいだ……
チゲ		n	Korean stew, Korean hot pot	Yeah! It must be news about restarting the Space Program.	おう！　きっとよ、宇宙計画が再開されるって話にちげえねえ
てきとう	適当	adj-na, n	suitable, proper, appropriate, adequate, fit,noncommittal, vague, equivocal, unserious, irresponsible	Ummm… Just look around.	ん～、そのへん適当に見て回ってな
まちくたびれる	待ちくたびれる	v1	to get tired of waiting	Even the moon'd get tired waitin' around for your ass!	お月さんがまちくたびれてそっぽ向いちまうぜ！
そっぽ	外方	n	the other way	Even the moon'd get tired waitin' around for your ass!	お月さんがまちくたびれてそっぽ向いちまうぜ！
ボンベ		n	compressed gas cylinder	Don't take so much time checkin' that *%$^# oxygen tank!	そんな酸素ボンベなんかをいつまでもガチャガチャチェックしてんじゃねえよ！
ガチャガチャ		n	clatter, clank, rattling,capsule toy vending machine	Don't take so much time checkin' that *%$^# oxygen tank!	そんな酸素ボンベなんかをいつまでもガチャガチャチェックしてんじゃねえよ！
てんち	天地	n	heaven and earth, the universe, nature, top and bottom, realm, sphere, world,top and bottom,gods of heaven and earth	That thing wouldn't break even if hell froze over.	そんなもん、天地がひっくり返ったって壊れやしねえんだから
ひっくりかえる	ひっくり返る	v5r, vi	to be overturned, to be reversed, to turn over, to capsize,to fall down, to tumble down, to topple over, to lie on one's back	That thing wouldn't break even if hell froze over.	そんなもん、天地がひっくり返ったって壊れやしねえんだから
へちま	糸瓜	n	sponge gourd (Luffa aegyptiaca), Egyptian cucumber, Vietnamese luffa, dishrag gourd,loofah, loofa, vegetable sponge,something useless	No buts!!	でももヘチマもねえ！！
てぎわ	手際	n	performance, execution, skill, dexterity, tact	You're not stupid, so be more efficient!	おめぇはバカじゃねぇんだからもちっと、手ぎわよくやれよ
けいき	計器	n	meter, gauge	Instrument panel…all clear. Shinra No. 26, ready for launch.	計器オールクリア。神羅２６号、発射準備よし
かんせい	管制	n, vs	control	Control	管制官
カウントダウン		n	countdown	Engine pressure rising. Shinra No. 26, 3 minutes to launch. Beginning countdown.	エンジン圧力上昇中。神羅２６号、発射３分前。カウントダウン開始
せんない	船内	n, adj-no	on-board ship, inboard	A mechanic is still in the engine section of the rocket!	まだ船内のエンジン部にメカニックが残っています！
おんせい	音声	n	voice, speech, sound of a voice,sound (e.g. of a TV)	I don't know. Activating the intercom in the engine section.	わかりません。エンジン部と音声つなぎます！
つなぐ	繋ぐ	v5g, vt	to connect, to link together,to tie, to fasten, to restrain,to maintain, to preserve, to keep,to transfer (phone call), to put a person through,to hedge, to buy or sell forward	I don't know. Activating the intercom in the engine section.	わかりません。エンジン部と音声つなぎます！
まんぞく	満足	adj-na, n	satisfaction, contentment, complacency,sufficient, enough, adequate, proper	I was still concerned. The results of the oxygen tank test weren't satisfactory.	どうしても心配だったんです。酸素ボンベのテストで満足いく結果がえられなくて
うんこ		n, vs	poop, faeces, feces	It's gonna get so hot in there that there ain't gonna be #$!% left when we blast off!	そこはなあ、打ち上げのときうんこッカスも残んねぇほどバカ熱くなるんだ！
いっしゅん	一瞬	n, n-adv, n-t	instant, moment, for an instant	You're gonna be burnt to a crisp! You're gonna die! You know that, doncha!?	そんなとこにいたら一瞬で黒コゲだぞ！おまえ、死んじまうんだぞ。わかってんのか！
しどう	始動	n, vs	starting (machine, engine, car, etc.), activation	Starting engine!	エンジン始動する！
てんか	点火	n, vs	ignition, lighting, firing, setting off	Ignite Engine!	エンジン点火！
おんど	温度	n	temperature	15 seconds until ignition. Internal temperature rising.	エンジン点火まで１５秒。船内温度上昇中
のり	海苔	n	nori, laver, [object Object]	We're praying for your safety!	ご無事をおいのりしています！
やくする	訳する	vs-s, vt	to translate, to interpret	Come on, Shera…hurry up… You're gonna die…	シエラ……はやくしろ……このままじゃ死んじまうんだぞ……
マーク		n	mark, symbol, insignia, logo, label, emblem,to mark, to put a mark on,trademark,paying attention to, focusing on, watching, guarding, marking,registering a record (in sport, etc.),Mach (OS kernel)	There's a Shinra logo on it. Tiny Bronco… This is cool.	神羅のマークがついている。タイニー・ブロンコか……いいな、これ
ひとりじめ	独り占め	n, vs	monopolising, monopolizing, hogging, having all to oneself	Shinra always keeps the best things for themselves. Let's take it!	神羅はよ、こういう便利な物は絶対に独り占めしちまうんだよな。いただいちまおうぜ！
またのな	またの名	exp, n	alias, another name	Nanaki, otherwise known as RED XIII.	ナナキ、またの名をRED XIII
そわそわ		adv, adv-to, vs	restlessly, nervously, uneasily, in a fidget	President Rufus is scheduled to come here. The Captain's been so restless all morning.	新社長のルーファウスさんがここへいらっしゃるそうなんです。艇長は朝からそわそわしてますわ
とびあがる	跳び上がる	v5r, vi	to spring, to jump up, to fly up, to skip	It's taking off.	とびあがっちゃうよ
びよく	尾翼	n	tail (of an aircraft), empennage, tail assembly	%#^@!! The tail's been hit!	シィィーット！！尾翼がやられてるじゃねえか！
ふじちゃく	不時着	n, vs	emergency landing, forced landing	Emergency landing…	不時着か……
しょうげき	衝撃	n, vs, adj-no	shock, impact, crash	This's gonna be a big splash. Hold on to your drawers and don't piss in 'em!	さあ、でっけぇ衝撃がくるぜ。チビらねえようにパンツをしっかりおさえてな！
おさえる	押さえる	v1, vt	to pin down, to hold down, to press down,to cover (esp. a part of one's body with one's hand), to clutch (a body part in pain), to press (a body part),to get a hold of, to obtain, to seize, to catch, to arrest,to grasp (a point), to comprehend,to quell, to subdue, to suppress, to repress, to hold back, to check, to curb, to contain	This's gonna be a big splash. Hold on to your drawers and don't piss in 'em!	さあ、でっけぇ衝撃がくるぜ。チビらねえようにパンツをしっかりおさえてな！
ボート		n	boat, rowing boat	Can't we use it as a boat?	ボートのかわりに使えるんじゃないか？
さんする	産する	vs-s, vi, vt	to bear (a child), to be born,to produce, to yield, to be produced, to be yielded	I'm all for it.	さんせい、よ
しんでん	神殿	n	temple, sacred place, shrine, sanctuary, tabernacle	Rufus was goin' after Sephiroth to the Temple of the Ancients.	ルーファウスのヤツはセフィロスを追って【古代種の神殿】に行くってほざいていたが
ほざく		v5k, vt	to say, to spatter, to prate, to prattle, to babble	Rufus was goin' after Sephiroth to the Temple of the Ancients.	ルーファウスのヤツはセフィロスを追って【古代種の神殿】に行くってほざいていたが
りくち	陸地	n, adj-no	land	Let's just head for land and get some information. Temple of the Ancients… that name bothers me.	情報をとるためにとにかく陸地をさがそう。【古代種の神殿】……気になる名前だな……