あれち	荒地	n	wasteland, wilderness, abandoned land, devastated land,The Wasteland (poem by T.S. Eliot)	Wilderness	荒れ地
まった	待った	n	false start of a bout,backsies (called when taking back a move in a game)	Wait, wait, wait, wai----t!!	待った待った待ったーっ！！
あや	綾	n	figure, design,twill weave, pattern of diagonal stripes,style (of writing), figure (of speech),design, plot, plan,minor market fluctuation, technical correction,cat's cradle,lease rod (in a loom)	…Hmmm… Something's fishy…	……ふ～ん……なんかアヤしいな～
しいる	強いる	v1, vt	to force, to compel, to coerce	…Hmmm… Something's fishy…	……ふ～ん……なんかアヤしいな～
たくらむ	企む	v5m, vt	to scheme, to plan, to play a trick, to invent, to conspire, to frame up	Hah, I know what you're thinkin'. And you sayin' that just now means you're up to somethin'! Right!?	……ハハーン、よめたぞ。そんなこと言っておまえまた何かたくらんでるんだろ！　ちがうか！
だしぬく	出し抜く	v5k, vt	to outwit, to outmanoeuvre, to steal a march on, to get the jump on, to anticipate, to forestall	Are you going to trick us again?	まさか、またオイラたちをだしぬこうとか……
たいど	態度	n, adj-no	attitude, manner, behaviour	There's something unnatural in the way YUFFIE's acting…	それにYUFFIEの態度にもどこか不自然なものが……
ふしぜん	不自然	adj-na, n	unnatural, artificial, affected, strained	There's something unnatural in the way YUFFIE's acting…	それにYUFFIEの態度にもどこか不自然なものが……
あとで	後で	adv	afterwards	So what does this mean? You will explain later.	これはどういうことか……後でじっくり説明してもらおうか
こころあたり	心当たり	n, adj-no	having in mind, happening to know of, idea	You had something else in mind?	ほかのことなら心当たりがあるというのか？
ぬきとる	抜き取る	v5r, vt	to pull out, to draw out, to disconnect,to steal contents of, to pilfer (from), to pickpocket	My Materia's been stolen…	みろ、マテリアがぬきとられている……！
こけ	苔	n	moss,short plants resembling moss (incl. other bryophytes, lichens, very small spermatophytes, etc.)	Takin' me for a fool!!	このオレ様をコケにしやがったな！！
きたのかた	北の方	n	northward, facing the north,nobleman's true wife	It looks like she went North. Let's hurry after her and get our Materia back!	あのコ、北の方に逃げたみたい。早く追いかけて、マテリア取り返さなくちゃ！
つげ	黄楊	n	Japanese box tree (Buxus microphylla var. japonica), Japanese boxwood	We can't just let her get away, right? Then, let's hurry after her! Which way? It's North, the North! It's a message from the stars!	ほっとくわけやないんですやろ？ほんな、ちゃっちゃと追いかけましょ！方角？北です、北！占いのおつげや！
たいかい	大海	n	ocean, large sea,fabric pattern	Life is just like a river. It flows from the large ocean of life, and eventually it returns back to it.	人の生、ただ水の流れににたり。命の大海より流れいでまた大海へと帰るものなり
このは	木の葉	n	foliage, leaves of trees	Life is like the dew on the leaves of the trees. Whether Meteor falls or not is no more than a fleeting glimmer.	人の生など、木の葉からしたたるあさつゆのようなもの。あの星が落ちようと落ちまいとほんの一瞬のきらめきにすぎないのです
したたる	滴る	v5r, vi	to drip, to drop, to trickle,to overflow (with freshness, beauty, etc.)	Life is like the dew on the leaves of the trees. Whether Meteor falls or not is no more than a fleeting glimmer.	人の生など、木の葉からしたたるあさつゆのようなもの。あの星が落ちようと落ちまいとほんの一瞬のきらめきにすぎないのです
つゆ	梅雨	n	rainy season (in Japan from early June to mid-July),rain during the rainy season	Life is like the dew on the leaves of the trees. Whether Meteor falls or not is no more than a fleeting glimmer.	人の生など、木の葉からしたたるあさつゆのようなもの。あの星が落ちようと落ちまいとほんの一瞬のきらめきにすぎないのです
きらめく	煌く	v5k, vi	to glitter, to glisten, to sparkle, to twinkle, to glare, to gleam	Life is like the dew on the leaves of the trees. Whether Meteor falls or not is no more than a fleeting glimmer.	人の生など、木の葉からしたたるあさつゆのようなもの。あの星が落ちようと落ちまいとほんの一瞬のきらめきにすぎないのです
たいそう	大層	adj-na	very, extremely, exceedingly, greatly, terribly,extreme, excessive, great many, large number of,splended, impressive, tremendous, immense,exaggerated	He used to be quite strong, but now, all he does is sleep…	むかしはたいそう強い方だったが今ではねてばかりだナ……
あがりこむ	上がりこむ	v5m, vi	to enter (house, room, etc.), to step in	She's always hung around places she thought might have it. That's just how she is. Sometimes she'll just bust into people's houses.	YUFFIEのやつ、あの性格だからナ。ときどき、人の家なんかに勝手にあがりこんだりするんだよ
ゴソゴソ		adv, adv-to, vs	rustling sound, rummaging sound	Always sneakin' around corners and doin' somethin' she shouldn't.	どっかすみっこのほうでまたゴソゴソと、何かしてるんじゃないかナ
ぞう	像	n, n-suf	image, figure, statue, picture, portrait,figure, form, shape, appearance,image	Two girls just went off towards Da-chao. I wonder if that place is popular with the kids now?	そうそう、たった今女の子がふたりダチャオ像の方へ行ったがあれが今のはやりなのかナ？
はやり	流行り	n, adj-no	fashion, fad, vogue, craze,prevalence (e.g. of a disease)	Two girls just went off towards Da-chao. I wonder if that place is popular with the kids now?	そうそう、たった今女の子がふたりダチャオ像の方へ行ったがあれが今のはやりなのかナ？
けっき	決起	n, vs	rising to action, standing up against, jumping to one's feet	But what can you do about it? Just go on living your life, day in and day out…	だからといって、私に何ができる？けっきょくいつもと同じ生活を送るしかないんだよナ……
てっぺん	天辺	n	top, summit, apex, peak,twelve o'clock (usu. midnight),top of one's head, top of a helmet, (top of) scalp, crown	I hear you can climb to the top, but since it's dangerous I'd be mighty careful if I were you!	てっぺんまでのぼることもできるんだけどちょっとアブないからよーくきをつけてねー！
ちらし	散らし	n	scattering,leaflets,sushi rice in a box or bowl with a variety of ingredients sprinkled on top,writing in an irregular hand	Publicity Flyers! Notice	チラシキャンペーンの おしらせ
キャンペーン		n	promotion (e.g. sales, etc.), marketing campaign,campaign (election, membership, enrolment, fund-raising, etc.), drive, movement,military campaign, military action, military maneuvers (maneouvers)	Publicity Flyers! Notice	チラシキャンペーンの おしらせ
おしらせ	お知らせ	n, vs	notice, notification	Publicity Flyers! Notice	チラシキャンペーンの おしらせ
さがしだす	探し出す	v5s, vt	to track down, to locate, to find out, to smoke out, to ferret out, to chase up, to discover	Flyer's will be posted all over the world. So make sure you look for our flyers that say "Turtle's Paradise" 	世界各地にはられている『かめ道楽』のチラシ【かめ道楽　通信】　をさがしだしてください。
ささやか	細やか	adj-na	meagre, meager, modest	There's six in all. If you find them all, make sure to let the owner of Turtle's Paradise know. You can win a prize!	チラシはぜんぶで６枚。 すべてさがしだした方は 『かめ道楽』主人におしらせ下さい。 ささやかな景品をプレゼント！！
やぶる	破る	v5r, vt	to tear, to rip, to break, to destroy,to break through (cordon, opponent's defense, etc.), to breach,to defeat, to beat,to break (e.g. silence), to disturb (e.g. peace), to shatter (e.g. dream), to disrupt, to spoil,to violate (e.g. rule), to break (e.g. promise), to infringe,to break (a record)	All you have to do is read them. Please don't take them down or rip them up!!	チラシは見るだけでオーケー！ 他のお客様のためにも やぶったりしないで下さいネ！！
そふ	祖父	n, adj-no	grandfather,old man,kyogen mask used for the role of an old man	Wutai‚ Old Man's House	ウータイ・おじじの家
どたばた		n	noisily (esp. the noise of heavy feet),slapstick	No, Gramps! These guy's are creepy! They're runnin' all over the place!	ちがうの、おじじ！すっごくアヤしい人たちよ！ドタバタ走り回ってるの！
このごろ	この頃	n-adv, n-t	recently, nowadays, these days, now, at present	Oh, you know lately things have been like that. You can even see the moon at noon. Everyone's celebrating.	おーおー、このごろはアレじゃな。ひるまでもお月さんが見えるんじゃナ。みんなもよろこんでおるわい
まっか	真っ赤	adj-na	bright red, deep red, flushed (of face),downright (e.g. lie), complete, utter	No, Gramps! That's a big red planet in the sky! Everyone's scared of it!!	ちがうの、おじじ！あれは、真っ赤に燃えてる星よ！みんなこわがってるの！
したう	慕う	v5u, vt	to yearn for, to long for, to pine for, to miss, to love dearly, to adore,to follow (someone),to idolize (for virtue, learning, status, etc.)	What are we going to do, Gramps? Some strange-looking girl came in here a minute ago and I…	どうしよう、おじじ！さっきもヘンなカッコしたおねえちゃんが、いきなり入ってきたとおもったら、あそこの……
ごする	伍する	vs-s, vi	to rank with, to rank among	Get ready to die!!	さあ、かくごしなさいっ！！
じめん	地面	n, adj-no	ground, earth's surface	First the ground started shaking, then that large star…	地面がグラグラゆれたと思ったら今度はあのでっかい星……
グラグラ		adv, adv-to, vs	wobbling, tottering, shaking, unstably, unsteadily,wavering (e.g. over a decision), dithering, indecisively,boiling up,dizzily, giddily	First the ground started shaking, then that large star…	地面がグラグラゆれたと思ったら今度はあのでっかい星……
バタバタ		n	flapping, rattling (sound), noisily, clattering noise,commotion, kerfuffle	It's been really loud and busy outside.	それにしても、おもてはさっきからバタバタさわがしいナ……
つぶ	粒	ctr	grain, bead, drop,counter for small round objects including grains, seeds, pills, drops	Someone outside must be up to something bad…	また誰か、おもてのツボに悪さでもしてるのかナ？
おもり	重り	n	weight,sinker (fishing)	We're off duty now and can't save your butts.	俺たちは休暇中につきあんたらのおもりはできないぞ、と
プロフェッショナル		adj-na, n	professional	I mean is that the way a professional, a Turk, would act!?	これがプロフェッショナルのタークスなんですか！？
プロ		n, adj-no	professional	Those who sacrifice themselves for their job aren't pros… …just fools.	仕事のためにすべてを犠牲にするのがプロじゃない。そんなのはただの仕事バカだ、と
すいじん	水神	n	a water god	Hey. Did you hear? There used to be a Water God here in Wutai.	ウーイ。旅の人、知ってるかい？このウータイにはむかし水神様がいたんだナ
かみさま	神様	n	God, god,ace, king, superior person, god (amongst men)	They say the Water God was a huge snake!	そりゃあでっけえヘビみてえな神様だったって話だ
うろこ	鱗	n	scale (of fish, snake, etc.),serif (on kana or kanji (e.g. in Mincho font))	Believe in the scales of the Water God and in Materia that has its power in it.	水神様のうろこだとか水神様の力をふうじたマテリアとかがさ
ふうじる	封じる	v1, vt	to seal (letter),to prevent, to forbid, to block	Believe in the scales of the Water God and in Materia that has its power in it.	水神様のうろこだとか水神様の力をふうじたマテリアとかがさ
ガサ		n	household search (conducted by the police)	Believe in the scales of the Water God and in Materia that has its power in it.	水神様のうろこだとか水神様の力をふうじたマテリアとかがさ
うり	売り	n-suf	sale, selling,selling point, gimmick,seller, vendor	How wonderful! Now here is your prize, just as we promised!!	なんとすばらしい！それではお約束どうりささやかな景品を！！
きょう	強	n-suf	a little over, a little more than,powerhouse, one of the biggest, one of the most powerful	Wutai‚Pagoda	ウータイ五強聖の塔
ごじゅうのとう	五重の塔	n	five-storied pagoda	That five-storied pagoda over there is called the Pagoda of the Five Mighty Gods…	あそこに見える五重の塔はウータイ五強聖の塔。五強の塔と呼ばれています
ぶ	武	n	the art of war, martial arts, military arts,military force, the sword,valor, bravery,military officer, military man	The Five Gods are Power, Speed, Magic, War and Omni. Omni has the best of the others.	五強聖とは力、速、魔、武そして、すべてをかねそなえた総の５人を意味します
かねそなえる	兼ね備える	v1, vt	to have both, to possess both, to combine with	The Five Gods are Power, Speed, Magic, War and Omni. Omni has the best of the others.	五強聖とは力、速、魔、武そして、すべてをかねそなえた総の５人を意味します
ふさ	房	n, ctr	tuft, tassel,bunch (of grapes, etc.),section (of an orange, etc.)	The Five Gods are Power, Speed, Magic, War and Omni. Omni has the best of the others.	五強聖とは力、速、魔、武そして、すべてをかねそなえた総の５人を意味します
まつる	祭る	v5r, vt	to deify, to enshrine,to pray, to worship	For generations, we in Wutai have worshipped Da-chao the Water God.	そしてここウータイでは古くからダチャオ様と水神様がまつられています
こらい	古来	adj-no, adv, n	from time immemorial, ancient, time-honoured, time-honored	Legend has it that the village has been protected by Da-chao, the Water God, and the Five Mighty Gods.	古来よりこのウータイは五強聖とダチャオ様、水神様により守られてきたと言われているのです
ひめる	秘める	v1, vt	to hide, to keep to oneself	They're not just regular scales. They have special hidden powers. They're impervious to the strongest flames.	なんでも不思議な力をひめたうろこでそれを前にするとどんな炎でも消えてしまうとか
にげあし	逃げ足	n	running away, escaping on foot	Hmm… Corneo's good at escaping…	フン、コルネオのやつ、あいかわらず逃げ足だけはたいしたものだ、と
やっかい	厄介	adj-na, n	trouble, burden, nuisance, bother, worry,care, dependence, support, kindness, obligation, staying (with a person)	If he has Elena, that's going to make things a little difficult.	イリーナが向こうの手にわたったとなるとちょっとやっかいだぞ、と
いね	稲	n	rice plant	And without that brat, we can't get our hands on our Materia!	あのガキがいねえとマテリアも取りもどせねえってこった
さらさら	更々	adv	(not) at all	That's fine. We have no intention of cooperating with you, either.	けっこうだ。俺たちもタークスと協力するつもりはサラサラない
ねがいさげる	願い下げる	v1, vt	to withdraw a request	Of course! There ain't no way we'd wanna work with the Turks anyway!	あったりめえじゃねえか！タークスと手を組むなんざ、こっちからねがいさげでえ
そうほんざん	総本山	n	head temple of a sect,(organizational) headquarters, (organisational) headquarters	Wutai‚Main Mtn.	ウータイ総本山
もめごと	揉め事	n	quarrel, trouble, dispute, friction (between people)	But, if you're in trouble with the Shinra, I'm going to have to ask you to leave.	ただ、神羅ともめごとを起こそうというのなら早々に出ていってくれ
はやばや	早々	adv, adv-to	early, quickly, promptly	But, if you're in trouble with the Shinra, I'm going to have to ask you to leave.	ただ、神羅ともめごとを起こそうというのなら早々に出ていってくれ
にらむ	睨む	v5m, vt	to glare at, to scowl at, to glower at,to stare intensely at, to examine carefully,to estimate, to guess, to suspect, to judge,to keep an eye on someone (e.g. a suspicious or untrustworthy person), to watch,to take account of, to take into consideration	I don't want the Shinra hanging around here looking over my shoulder.	神羅ににらまれたくはないのでな……
いくじ	育児	n, vs	childcare, child-rearing, nursing, upbringing	What's with you, you coward?	なんだい、このいくじなし！
ポリシー		n	policy	That's my style! And it's my business, not yours! Don't try and dictate what I should do!	アタシのセンスだもんそんなの勝手だろ！人のポリシーに口ださないでよ！
しゅりけん	手裏剣	n	shuriken, small throwing blade, small edged weapon often used for throwing, throwing star	Received "Magic Shuriken"!	『風魔手裏剣』を手にいれた！
ざす	座州	n, vs	stranding, running aground	Received "Hairpin"!	『かんざし』を手にいれた！
きれ	切れ	ctr	piece, slice, strip, scrap,cloth,sharpness,counter for scraps, pieces, etc.	We got some of the best blades right out of the furnace! So strike while the iron's hot!	鉄は熱いうちに打てってな！できたてのキレモノがそろってるぜ！
こないだ	此間	n-adv, n-t	the other day, lately, recently	Listen, I'm sorry about last time. YUFFIE told me not to sell anything to you.	やあ。こないだは悪かったな。じつはYUFFIEちゃんにアンタらに売るの、止められててさ
きかす	聞かす	v5s, vt	to let (someone) hear, to tell (e.g. a story), to inform (of),to make (someone) listen, to make (someone) understand, to drum into (someone),to grip (someone) with skilful singing, storytelling, etc., to hold (someone) enchanted by	…I've been hearing that ever since I was little.	……小さいころから聞かされてた
じゅうよう	重要	adj-na, n	important, momentous, essential, principal, major	You've got our Materia and I want it back…now.	俺たちに重要なのはいま俺たちのマテリアをおまえがもっているということだ
レバー		n	lever, joystick,liver	That…sniff…switch… the lever on the left…… Materia's…sniff, hic…in there.	そこにヒック……スイッチ……左のレバー……マテリア、ヒック……かくして……
さげる	下げる	v1, vt	to hang, to suspend, to wear (e.g. decoration),to lower, to reduce, to bring down,to demote, to move back, to pull back,to clear (plates), to remove (food, etc. from table or altar)	Flip the Left Lever	左のレバーをさげる
めじるし	目印	n	mark, sign, landmark, benchmark	Drink at the "Turtle's Paradise" and talk about Wutai! To find "Turtle's Paradise", look for the big pot outside!!	『かめ道楽』で飲まずしてウータイを語るなかれ！居酒屋『かめ道楽』はでっかいツボが目印です！！
いちどに	一度に	adv	all at once	Two for one, in fact! Heh, heh!	いちどにふたりも！ほひ～ほひ～！
どうにも	如何にも	exp, adv	(not) in any way, in no way	He's in the pagoda next to Lord Godo. Lord Godo says we're stuck…	ゴドー様はとなりにある五強の塔にこもりっきりじゃ。ゴドー様でもあんなものはどうにもならんて……
こむすめ	小娘	n	young girl (approx. 14-15 years old), lass, adolescent female	Don't worry. We won't do anything to that girl, YUFFIE.	心配するな。俺たちも、YUFFIEとかいう小娘には何もしやしない、と
あっというまに	あっという間に	exp, adv	just like that, in the twinkling of an eye, in the blink of an eye, [object Object]	Can't go through here… That flame would fry me in an instant.	これは無理だな。この炎じゃ、あっという間に黒コゲだ
ねす	熱す	v5s, vi	to get a fever	I like hot baths, but this is TOO hot!	フロは熱いにかぎるがこいつは、ちいとばかり熱すぎんぜ！
ぎん	銀	n	silver (Ag),silver coin, money,silver medal,silver colour, silver color,bank,silver general	I like hot baths, but this is TOO hot!	フロは熱いにかぎるがこいつは、ちいとばかり熱すぎんぜ！
おうおう	往々	adv	sometimes, often	Hey, hey, hey! That's as far as you go!	おうおうおう！そのヘンにしときな！
おとしあな	落とし穴	n	pitfall, trap, pit	That fall into the trap really hurt!	痛かったんだから！あの落とし穴……！
こりる	懲りる	v1, vi	to learn by experience, to learn one's lesson, to learn the hard way,to have enough (of), to be disgusted with	You just don't get it, do you…!?	こりない人ねこんなマネして……！
ハイエナ		n	hyena	 You damn Midgar hyena…!	このミッドガルのハイエナ野郎……！
はなす	放す	v5s, vt	to release, to let go, to free, to set free, to let loose, to turn loose,to add (pieces of eggplant, potato, etc.) to water, broth, etc.	Hurry and let the two go!	早くふたりを放せ！
スマート		adj-na, n	smart, stylish,slim	I don't care what you're doing, so much as the idiotic way you're doing it…	どうでもいいが、やり方がスマートではないな……
おろす	下ろす	v5s, vt	to take down (e.g. flag), to launch (e.g. boat), to drop, to lower (e.g. ladder), to let (a person) off, to unload, to discharge,to drop off (a passenger from a vehicle), to let (a person) off,to withdraw (cash),to wear (clothing) for the first time,to fillet (e.g. a fish)	We don't want to hear it! Just let them go!	話さなくていーの！早くふたりを降ろしなさい！
うでずく	腕ずく	n, adj-no	main force, brute force, strong-arm	I don't really give a damn! You're gonna let them go, or else I'm gonna break your arm!	んなこた、どーでもいーんだよ！ネエちゃんたちを、返してもらうぜ。腕ずくでもな！
よくも	善くも	adv	How dare ..., How could ...	Why did you kill my little Aps?	あの時は俺の可愛いアプスをよくも殺ってくれたな……
やる	殺る	v5r, vt	to do someone in, to bump someone off	Why did you kill my little Aps?	あの時は俺の可愛いアプスをよくも殺ってくれたな……
おうじ	王子	n	prince,subordinate Kumano shrine	Don't be such a poor loser, old man!	おうじょうぎわが、わりーぜ！とっつぁん！！
わり	割	n-suf	rate, ratio, proportion, percentage,profit,assignment,10%, unit of ten percent,match, schedule of matches,diluted with (of drinks), mixed with	Don't be such a poor loser, old man!	おうじょうぎわが、わりーぜ！とっつぁん！！
プライド		n	pride	Why do you think a bad guy like me would swallow his pride and plead for his life?	俺たちみたいな悪堂がこうやってプライドをすててまで命ごいするのは、どんなときだと思う？
まっさかさま	真っ逆さま	adj-na, n	head over heels, headlong, head first	Once I push this button, they'll fall and we'll have SQUASHED TOMATOES!	このスイッチを押すと、このまま下に真っ逆さま……つぶれたトマトのでき上がり！
トマト		n	tomato (Solanum lycopersicum)	Once I push this button, they'll fall and we'll have SQUASHED TOMATOES!	このスイッチを押すと、このまま下に真っ逆さま……つぶれたトマトのでき上がり！
げどう	外道	n	tirthika, non-Buddhist teachings, non-Buddhist,heterodoxy, unorthodoxy, heresy, heretic,demon, fiend, devil, brute, bad person,type of fish one did not intend to catch	So this is how a loser lives!	この、クサレ外道が……！
ほうむる	葬る	v5r, vt	to bury, to inter, to entomb,to cover up, to hush up, to shelve	We're going to take care of you… personally.	俺たちの手でほうむり去られるとな、と
さる	去る	adj-pn	to leave, to go away,to pass, to elapse,to be distant,to send away, to drive off, to divorce,to (do) completely,last ... (e.g. "last April")	We're going to take care of you… personally.	俺たちの手でほうむり去られるとな、と
おいつめる	追い詰める	v1, vt	to corner, to drive to the wall, to run down, to track down, to chase after	Why do you think we went to all the trouble of teaming up with those guys to get you…?	俺たちが、ヤツらと組んでまできさまを追いつめるのはなぜだと思う……？、と
せいかい	正解	n, vs	correct, right, correct interpretation (answer, solution)	All wrong.	どれも不正解、と
ただちに	直ちに	adv	at once, immediately, directly, in person, automatically	Yes…Yes… I'll get on it right away.	はい……はい……ただちに、かかります、と
ひばん	非番	n, adj-no	off duty	No, today's our day off.	いや、今日は非番だ、と
いつわる	偽る	v5r, vt	to lie, to cheat, to pretend, to feign, to falsify,to trick, to deceive	Hey! I can't stand liars! Leave this tower at once!	ええい！　正体をいつわるとはふとどきせんばん！即刻この塔から出ていかれよ！
ふと	不図	adv	suddenly, casually, accidentally, incidentally, unexpectedly, unintentionally	Hey! I can't stand liars! Leave this tower at once!	ええい！　正体をいつわるとはふとどきせんばん！即刻この塔から出ていかれよ！
きせん	汽船	n	steamship, steamboat, steamer	Hey! I can't stand liars! Leave this tower at once!	ええい！　正体をいつわるとはふとどきせんばん！即刻この塔から出ていかれよ！
そっこく	即刻	n-adv	immediately, at once, instantly	Hey! I can't stand liars! Leave this tower at once!	ええい！　正体をいつわるとはふとどきせんばん！即刻この塔から出ていかれよ！
シェーク		n, vs	shake	Yo! They call me Shake! I'll be watchin' your fight with Gorky!	いよ！　オラ、シェイクってんだ！ゴーリキーと、あんたの手合わせはオラが見届けさしてもらうよ！
てあわせ	手合わせ	n	game, contest, bout	Yo! They call me Shake! I'll be watchin' your fight with Gorky!	いよ！　オラ、シェイクってんだ！ゴーリキーと、あんたの手合わせはオラが見届けさしてもらうよ！
しょうらい	招来	n, vs	invitation, bringing over,bringing about, giving rise to, causing, incurring	Power Change!	力変化招来！
ふし	節	n	joint, knuckle,tune, melody,knot (in wood), node in a bamboo stem,part, notable characteristic	Are you blind? I'm right here!	あんたの目はふし穴か？ここに、いんじゃん！
どこぞ	何処ぞ	n	somewhere (very vague), someplace (very vague)	Heh! Punk. I'm more of an adult than some bimbo girl!	ヘン、何を言うかね！どこぞのバカ娘よりはオラの方が、よっぽど大人よ！
ゆえん	所以	n	reason, way of doing, cause, grounds	See what I mean? That kind of anger's what makes you so immature!	ヘッヘ！　そうやってムキになるのがガキたるゆえんよ！
いちにんまえ	一人前	adj-no, adj-na	one portion, one serving, one person,adult, grown-up, person who has come of age,fully fledged, established, qualified	'bout the only thing you do really good is breathe! Are you sure you wanna fight?	ハナいきだけは一人前だね！ホントにやる根性あんの？
こんじょう	根性	n	willpower, guts, determination, grit, spirit,character, nature, disposition, personality	'bout the only thing you do really good is breathe! Are you sure you wanna fight?	ハナいきだけは一人前だね！ホントにやる根性あんの？
おしゃべり	お喋り	adj-na, n	chattering, talk, idle talk, chat, chitchat, gossip,chatty, talkative, chatterbox, blabbermouth	Stop yappin'!	おしゃべりは、もういい！
たちあう	立ち合う	v5u, vi	to be matched against (in a sports contest)	I guess it's Chekhov's turn…	では、このチェホフが立ち合いましょうぞ……
ぶとう	武闘	n	armed struggle	You don't belong here! This is the Wutai Temple of Martial Arts!	あんたらじゃダ～メ！ここはウータイ武闘術五強聖の塔だぜ！
むしる	毟る	v5r, vt	to pluck, to pick, to tear	Hey, you there! Don't ignore me!	コラコラ、そこの～！オラをムシすんなって！
かいじょう	階上	n	upper floor, upstairs,top of the stairs	You can't go to the next floor unless you beat Shake.	シェイクを倒さずして階上に上がることあいなりませんぞ……
あいなる	相成る	v5r	to become (formal)	You can't go to the next floor unless you beat Shake.	シェイクを倒さずして階上に上がることあいなりませんぞ……
うずく	疼く	v5k, vi	to throb, to ache	Ho, ho, ho… It's been a while since I felt pain…	ホッホッホ……ひさかたぶりに、うずきますぞ……
やぶれる	敗れる	v1, vi	to be defeated, to be beaten, to be unsuccessful, to lose	So even Shake's been defeated. It's been a while since you had to fight, eh Chekhov?	なんとシェイクまで、敗れたか。チェホフ、そなたの出番もひさしぶりだな
たげる		v1, aux-v	to do for (the sake of someone else)	That ain't going to happen! I'll teach you about the strength of youth!	そんなワケにはいかないのよね～！若さが強さってとこ教えたげるよ
いきがる	粋がる	v5r, vi	to be pretentious, to put on airs, to try to appear smart, to act brave, to try to look cool	Keep mouthing off like that, little girl, and you're going to get burned.	小娘が、いきがっておるとやけどくらいですまぬぞえ
やけど	火傷	n, vs	burn, scald	Keep mouthing off like that, little girl, and you're going to get burned.	小娘が、いきがっておるとやけどくらいですまぬぞえ
ひあそび	火遊び	n, vs	playing with fire,playing with something dangerous,playing around (love), flirting, having an affair	I got insurance.	あいにく火遊びは大好きなの
わら	藁	n	straw	Ho, ho, ho. We'll see if you still talk like that after you taste some of my Sacred Magic…	ホッホッホ。魔の強聖のわらわと試合った後でも、そのへらず口きけるといいが……
しあい	試合	n, vs	match, game, bout, contest	Ho, ho, ho. We'll see if you still talk like that after you taste some of my Sacred Magic…	ホッホッホ。魔の強聖のわらわと試合った後でも、そのへらず口きけるといいが……
ならでは		exp	distinctive of, characteristic of, uniquely applying to, special to,but, except, without, but for	Ho, ho, ho. What do you expect from a child barely out of diapers!?	ホッホホ。ケツの青い小娘ならではのへらず口だこと
さびる	錆びる	v1, vi	to rust, to become rusty	This should be interesting! It's been too long since I've had a chance to use my full power…	面白い……！ひさびさに我が腕、ぞんぶんにふるえそうだな……
ぞんぶん	存分	adj-na, adv, n	to one's heart's content, as much as one wants	This should be interesting! It's been too long since I've had a chance to use my full power…	面白い……！ひさびさに我が腕、ぞんぶんにふるえそうだな……
じょうじん	常人	n	ordinary person, run-of-the-mill people, John Doe, Jane Doe	This is the average person's limit?	やはり常人では、ここまでが限度か……
げんど	限度	n	limit, bounds	This is the average person's limit?	やはり常人では、ここまでが限度か……
すどおり	素通り	n, vs	passing through without stopping, passing by	How dare they mock us, thinking they could sneak past us.	ここを素通りしようとはわらわも、なめられたものよ
さいじょうかい	最上階	n	top floor	The rule is the best fighter on each floor will be your opponent… This is a five-storied pagoda,but the fourth floor is the highest…	ここ、４階までは階上の者が立ち合うのが、ならわし……。しかし、ここは五強の塔４階にして最上階の意味を持つ……
はい	敗	suf, ctr	loss, defeat,counter for losses	In other words, no one has ever defeated me--Master of Weaponry!	すなわち！武の強聖の、私を敗った者はかつてないということだ
かつて	嘗て	adv, adj-no	once, before, formerly, ever, former, ex-,never yet, never before, first time, still not happened	In other words, no one has ever defeated me--Master of Weaponry!	すなわち！武の強聖の、私を敗った者はかつてないということだ
むねん	無念	n	regret, chagrin, mortification,freedom from obstructive thoughts	How unfortunate! It was over before I could even put all my strength into it…	無念！今回も力をすべて出せずに終わってしまった……
みごと	見事	n	splendid, magnificent, excellent, fine, superb, beautiful, admirable,utter (esp. defeat), total, complete,something worth seeing, sight, spectacle	Splendid! You have definitely improved…	お見事！かくも腕を上げられたとは……
まみえる	見える	v1, vi	to have an audience, to meet, to see,to face (an enemy), to confront,to serve (esp. as one's wife)	You have defeated four of our best, but now you will have to face HIM!	最上階の立ち合いは我ら４人！あの方と相まみえていただきましょうぞ……！
どの	殿	suf	Mr., Mrs., Miss, Ms.	If it were not for Miss YUFFIE, I wouldn't be facing him…	YUFFIE殿でなければ私が相まみえるわけには参りませぬな……
しょぎょう	所行	n	deed, act	You didn't seem like someone who could get to the fourth floor so easily…	労せずして実をえようとはこの４階まで来た者とも思えん所業……
おのれ	己	int	oneself (itself, etc.),I, me,you,by oneself (itself, etc.),interjection expressing anger or chagrin	I'll answer you by having you try your skills against me!	聞きたい事は、ワシの体におのれの技で聞くが良い！
のちほど	後ほど	adv, n	later on, eventually, afterwards	Then, come back for it later. And don't forget!	ならば、後ほど受け取れい。忘れぬようにな！
せいは	制覇	n, vs	conquest, domination, mastery	But, Lord Godo. Leviathan Materia should only be given to the person who conquers and takes over this Pagoda. That is our custom…	しかし、ゴドー様。水神様のマテリアは、五強の塔を制覇し、新たに五強聖をおさめる者が持つのが、ならわし……
おさめる	収める	v1, vt	to dedicate, to make an offering, to pay (fees),to supply,to store,to finish, to bring to a close,to restore (something to its place),to achieve (e.g. a result)	But, Lord Godo. Leviathan Materia should only be given to the person who conquers and takes over this Pagoda. That is our custom…	しかし、ゴドー様。水神様のマテリアは、五強の塔を制覇し、新たに五強聖をおさめる者が持つのが、ならわし……
ひなびる	鄙びる	v1, vi	to become rustic, to be countrified	You turned Wutai into a cheesy resort town peddling to tourists…	ウータイを、こんな、ひなびた観光地にして、ヨソ者にこびて……
こびる	媚びる	v1, vi	to flatter, to curry favor with, to curry favour with, to fawn on, to butter up to,to flirt with (woman with a man), to make eyes at (a man)	You turned Wutai into a cheesy resort town peddling to tourists…	ウータイを、こんな、ひなびた観光地にして、ヨソ者にこびて……
たしゃ	他者	n	another person, others	…or just something to show-off?	他者に対し見せつけるものなのかとな……
みせつける	見せつける	v1, vt	to make a display of, to show off, to flaunt	…or just something to show-off?	他者に対し見せつけるものなのかとな……
きょうしゃ	強者	n	strong person	Might begets might.	力を見せつける強者は、強者を呼ぶ。それが戦になる……
こころざし	志	n	will, resolution, intention, ambition, aim, goal,kindness, goodwill, kind offer,gift (as a token of gratitude)	Strength without determination means nothing. And determination without strength is equally useless…!	志のない力では、意味がない。力のない志では、それもかなわぬ……！
どうこう	同行	n	accompanying, travelling together, traveling together,same bank	You there, please take YUFFIE with you!	そなたたち、YUFFIEを同行させてやってくれい！
おおぶね	大船	n	large boat	Well, just tell yourself you're on a big ship, and leave the rest to ol' CID!	ま、大船に乗ったつもりでこのCID様にまかせときなって！
ねづく	根付く	v5k, vi	to take root, to strike	For the sake of Wutai!	ウータイに真の強さを根づかせるためにもな！
ずみ	済み	n-suf, n	arranged, taken care of, settled, completed, finished	Do you think they'll still want all their Materia?	戦いが終われば、たぶん用ずみになるんではないかな？
なにとぞ	何卒	adv	please, kindly, I beg of you, if it pleases you,by all means, without fail	Please take care of Miss YUFFIE.	YUFFIE殿を、なにとぞよろしくおたのもうしますぞ
もうす	申す	v5s, vt	to say, to be called,to do	Please take care of Miss YUFFIE.	YUFFIE殿を、なにとぞよろしくおたのもうしますぞ
ぶうん	武運	n	the fortunes of war	Miss YUFFIE. We pray for your success!	YUFFIE様。ご武運を、おいのりしております！
そめる	染める	v1, vt	to dye, to colour, to color	Winning Miss YUFFIE's heart must mean you have tremendous skill.	YUFFIE様に見そめられるとはそれがしたちも、かなり腕にはおぼえがあられますな
おりづる	折り鶴	n	folded paper crane	Received "Oritsuru"!	『折り鶴』を手にいれた！
はぶ	波布	n	habu (Trimeresurus flavoviridis), yellow-spotted pit viper	At least, after all that, we got the Materia back.	ま、なにはともあれマテリアはぶじに戻ってきたし