しょくにん	職人	n, adj-no	worker, mechanic, artisan, craftsman	Weapon seller	武器職人の小屋
トーン		n	tone	But if it's the 'Keystone' you're looking for, you're too late. Don't have it.	けど、ひと足遅かったな『キーストーン』ならもう、ねぇよ
めあて	目当て	n	mark, guide, landmark,purpose, aim, goal, intention, end,sight (on a firearm)	What? You didn't come here for that?	なんだ、お前らあれ目当てで来たんじゃないのか？
いにしえ	古	n	antiquity, ancient times	The 'Keystone' is the key that unlocks the gate to a very old temple somewhere.  “You're not going to believe your ears,	『キーストーン』ってのはこの世界のどこかにある古～い、神殿の扉を開けるカギよ
いわす	言わす	v5s, vt	to be able to say, to get someone to say, to induce someone to say, to let someone speak out	That guy had a way about him that made you feel like it may not be a good idea NOT to sell it to him…	ど～も、あの人のウムも言わさぬ迫力に負けちまってツイ…
はくりょく	迫力	n	impressiveness, impact, force, intensity, appeal, strength, punch, edge, vigor	That guy had a way about him that made you feel like it may not be a good idea NOT to sell it to him…	ど～も、あの人のウムも言わさぬ迫力に負けちまってツイ…
つい	対	ctr	pair, couple, set,antithesis,counter for items that come in pairs,counter for sets (of clothes, small furniture, utensils, etc.)	That guy had a way about him that made you feel like it may not be a good idea NOT to sell it to him…	ど～も、あの人のウムも言わさぬ迫力に負けちまってツイ…
おもし	重し	n	stone weight (as used on pickle-tub covers),weight (as used in balances)	Come on…it's only a legend. But if it were true, that sure would be something, huh?	だから、言い伝えだってまぁ、けど本当にあったらおもしれぇな
ざいりょう	材料	n	ingredients, material,material (for a novel, experiment, etc.), subject matter, data,basis (for a decision), grounds, evidence,(market) factor	All the weapons you see here I made myself. But lately I haven't been able to get materials…	ここの武器はぜ～んぶ、オレ様の作品だ。けど、最近は材料が手に入らなくてなぁ
ふくいん	福音	n, adj-no	good news,gospel (teachings or revelations of Jesus Christ)	Received "Great Gospel"!	『大いなる福音』を手にいれた！
ベット		n	bet,vet	Oh all right. You can use that bed.	しょ～がねぇなベット使っていいぜ
しゅうまつ	週末	n-adv, n	weekend	Weekend Clock	『週末の時計』
とけい	時計	n	watch, clock, timepiece	Weekend Clock	『週末の時計』
ちしゃ	知者	n	sage, wise man, wise person, man of wisdom,buddha, bodhisattva, enlightened priest	Chisa's Mask	『チサのカメン』
かく	画	n, n-suf, ctr	stroke (of a kanji, etc.)	Dio's Portrait	『ディオ画』
よびかける	呼びかける	v1, vt	to call out to, to hail, to address,to appeal	Calling Gourd	『呼びかけるひょうたん』
ひょうたん	氷炭	n	ice and charcoal, contradiction	Calling Gourd	『呼びかけるひょうたん』
かしだし	貸し出し	n, vs	lending, loaning	Heh, heh, heh. Sorry, but it's not for rent.	はっはははは残念だが、貸し出しは禁止だよ
ぼうだんチョッキ	防弾チョッキ	n	bulletproof vest	Received "Protect Vest"!	『防弾チョッキ』を手に入れた！！
かかりいん	係員	n	official (e.g. customs), clerk in charge	Staff	係員
あふれる	溢れる	v1, vi	to overflow, to brim over, to flood	A land full of Mako energy. …Or at least that's what the Shinra believe.	魔晄エネルギーに満ちあふれた豊かな土地。……これは神羅の考え方だ
あるきまわる	歩き回る	v5r	to walk about, to walk to and fro, to pace around	So Sephiroth is traveling the world because he's searching for the Promised Land? Is that it?	セフィロスが世界のあちこちを歩き回ってるのは約束の地をさがしてるのね
ほんにん	本人	n, adj-no	the person himself	That's why I think we should just go after Sephiroth himself.	だから、セフィロス本人だけ追いかければいいんじゃないかな？
しらむ	白む	v5m, vi	to grow light, to become white, to turn grey (gray)	I don't know what's goin' on, but we're in a bad situation…	なんやしらんけどへんなことになってしまいましたな～