はんだん	判断	n	judgment, judgement, decision, conclusion, adjudication,divination,judgement	The President… was wrong…	社長は……判断をあや……まった……
さいだん	祭壇	n	altar	The Keystone… Place it…on…the altar…	キーストーン……祭壇に……置いて……み……ろ
めまい	目眩	n, vs, adj-no	dizziness, giddiness, vertigo	Oh man, you gotta be kiddin'. This is makin' me dizzy!	ウッ～　冗談じゃねえ。めまいがするぜ！
なげだす	投げ出す	v5s, vt	to throw down, to throw out, to stretch out (one's legs),to abandon, to resign,to give freely, to give generously, to sacrifice (e.g. one's life),to start to throw	Don't give up! We can do it!	なげださないで！がんばろう、ね！
ひびき	響き	n	echo, reverberation,sound (esp. the distinctive sound of an object or activity, e.g. rain, gun, gallop, drum), noise,quality of a sound (e.g. a fine phrase, clear voice, resonant bell), feeling of a sound, emotion or feeling inspired by something heard or read	Sealed……? That sound brings back memories.	封印されている……？なんだか、なつかしい響きだな
パンチ		n	punch (with the fist),punching (a hole), hole punch,punch (drink),punch (in a song, speech, etc.), impact	Received "Rocket Punch"!	『ロケットパンチ』を手にいれた！
としつき	年月	n	months and years	Over the many years, they've lost the ability to talk.	ながい年月は彼らから言葉を失わせた
おびえる	怯える	v1, vi	to become frightened, to be frightened (of), to be scared (of)	No good. I don't understand the rest. Are you afraid?	だめ、あとはわからない。おびえているの……？
モップ		n	mop	Received "Mop"!	『モップ』を手にいれた！
へきが	壁画	n	fresco, mural, wall painting	Temple of the Ancients	壁画の間
ち	知	n	wisdom,jnana (higher knowledge)	A lost treasure house of knowledge. The wisdom of the Ancients….	失われた知の宝庫。古代種の知恵……知識
ほうこ	宝庫	n	treasury, treasure house	A lost treasure house of knowledge. The wisdom of the Ancients….	失われた知の宝庫。古代種の知恵……知識
ちえ	知恵	n	wisdom, wit, sagacity, sense, intelligence,prajna (insight leading to enlightenment)	A lost treasure house of knowledge. The wisdom of the Ancients….	失われた知の宝庫。古代種の知恵……知識
どうか	同化	n, vs	assimilation, absorption,adaptation,assimilation, anabolism,assimilation (phonology)	I will meld with it all. I will become one with it… it will become one with me.	私はすべてと同化する。私がすべて……すべては私となる
やがて	軈て	adv	before long, soon,almost, nearly,finally, in the end, eventually	For it is through death that a new spirit energy is born. Soon, you will live again as a part of me.	死によって生まれる新たな精神エネルギー。やがて私の一部として生きることができる
げんえい	幻影	n, adj-no	phantom, vision, illusion	An illusion the Ancients showed.	古代種が見せた幻影か……
おおあな	大穴	n	large hole,great deficit, heavy losses,big and unexpected winnings, a killing (e.g. on a race),dark horse (horse racing)	Temple of the Ancients	時の大穴
ばんにん	番人	n	guard, watchman	I am the Time Guardian. Ye who seek the knowledge of the Ancients. I control the time, select your path.	我、時の番人なり。古代種の知識を求めるものよ。我が時を制し、道をきずけ
せいす	制す	v5s, vt	to control, to command, to get the better of	I am the Time Guardian. Ye who seek the knowledge of the Ancients. I control the time, select your path.	我、時の番人なり。古代種の知識を求めるものよ。我が時を制し、道をきずけ
さかのぼる	遡る	v5r, vi	to go upstream,to go back (in time, to origin), to date back to, to trace back to, to make retroactive	Go back in time	時をさかのぼる
とりけす	取り消す	v5s, vt	to cancel, to withdraw, to retract, to take back (words, etc.), to revoke	Cancel	とりけし
ルーレット		n	roulette	[OK]: Spin	○ボタン：ルーレット回転
かいてん	回転	n, vs	rotation (usu. around something), revolution, turning	[OK]: Spin	○ボタン：ルーレット回転
くぎ	釘	n	nail (i.e. small metal spike)	Received "Nail Bat"!	『釘バット』を手にいれた！
バット		n	bat (in baseball, cricket, etc.),bat (animal),vat, tray	Received "Nail Bat"!	『釘バット』を手にいれた！
プリンセス		n	princess	Received "Princess Guard"!	『プリンセスガード』を手にいれた！
ほらがい	ほら貝	n	conch (esp. Charonia tritonis), trumpet shell	Received "Trumpet Shell"!	『法螺貝』を手にいれた！
ぐんて	軍手	n	cotton gloves, working gloves	Received "Work Glove"!	『軍手』を手にいれた！
もちにげ	持ち逃げ	adj-f	making off with (something), absconding,stolen, absconded (with)	The Guard that escaped with the key to the door moves on a set course.	扉の鍵を持ち逃げした番人は一定のルートを移動しています
いってい	一定	n, adj-no, vs, adj-na	fixed, settled, constant, definite, uniform, regularized, regularised, defined, standardized, standardised, certain, prescribed	The Guard that escaped with the key to the door moves on a set course.	扉の鍵を持ち逃げした番人は一定のルートを移動しています
だんさ	段差	n	difference in grades (e.g. in go, shoji, etc.),difference in level (e.g. road, footpath), ramp, steps, bump (in road)	Oh yeah, oh yeah… you can jump down to the ramp below and to the left of the screen.	それからそれから画面左の段差からは下の段に飛びおりることができます
だん	段	ctr	step, stair, (flight of) steps, (row of) stitches, columns (of print),grade, rank, level,counter for breaks in written language (or speech, etc.),dan, [object Object]	Oh yeah, oh yeah… you can jump down to the ramp below and to the left of the screen.	それからそれから画面左の段差からは下の段に飛びおりることができます
とじこめる	閉じ込める	v1, vt	to lock up, to shut up, to imprison	Looks like we're locked in.	閉じこめられたようだ
きずぐち	傷口	n	(opening of) a wound, (mouth of a) wound, cut	Once the Planet is hurt, it gathers Spirit Energy to heal the injury.	星は傷ができると治療のために傷口に精神エネルギーを集める
ひれい	比例	n, vs	proportion	The amount of energy gathered depends on the size of the injury.	傷の大きさに比例して集まるエネルギーの大きさが決まる
まじわる	交わる	v5r, vi	to cross, to intersect, to join, to meet,to associate with, to mingle with, to consort with,to have a sexual relationship, to copulate	Melding with the Planet… I will cease to exist as I am now…	星とまじわり……私は…… 今は失われ、かつて人の心を支配した存在……
うまれかわる	生まれ変わる	v5r	to be born again, to make a fresh start in life	Only to be reborn as a 'God' to rule over every soul.	『神』として生まれ変わるのだ
さいがい	災害	n	calamity, disaster, misfortune	Is it some sort of a disaster?	なんかの災害か？
ただよう	漂う	v5u, vi	to drift, to float,to waft (e.g. a scent), to hang in the air,to be in the air (e.g. a feeling or mood),to wander, to walk around aimlessly,to be unsteady, to be unstable,to falter, to flinch, to wince,to live in unreliable circumstances	It finds small drifting planets with its magic.	宇宙をただよっている小さな星を魔法の力で呼びよせるの
しょうとつ	衝突	n, vs	collision, crash, running into,conflict, quarrel, clashing	And then collides with them. This Planet might get wiped out entirely…	そして……衝突。この星、完全に壊れちゃうかも……
さかえる	栄える	v1, vi	to prosper, to flourish	During the time when the Ancients prospered there existed beings that grew up bathed in abundant Mako.	かつて古代種がさかえたころ豊富な魔晄の光をあびて育った種族がいた
じゅん	純	pref	innocent, chaste, naive,pure, genuine	They were pure creatures of natural shape. Several remain even now.	自然な形の純すいなモンスターたちだ。いまでもいくつかの種族は残っている
さ	然	adv	so, like that, in that way	Correct. Such a clever girl.	然り。理解のはやい娘だ
いきながらえる	生き長らえる	v1, vi	to live long, to survive	The creatures that protect this temple have lived long, relics from the age of the Ancients.	この神殿を守るものは古代種の時代から時をこえ生きながらえてきたモンスター
おもいしる	思い知る	v5r, vt	to realize, to realise	Heh heh heh… Keep that in mind.	クックックッ……思い知るがいい
ゆらす	揺らす	v5s, vt	to rock, to shake, to swing	Shake it	ゆらす
そのもの	その物	exp, n, n-suf	the very thing, itself	They said that the Temple itself is the Black Materia.	この神殿そのものが黒マテリアだって
ぶんしん	分身	n, vs	parturition, delivery, one's child, branch, offshoot, one's other self	Because Sephiroth has lots of different flunkies.	だって、そうだろ？セフィロスにはたくさんの分身がいるじゃないか
つくり	作り	n-pref	making, producing, manufacturing, building, construction, make, structure,appearance (attire, make-up, etc.),build, physique,sashimi,forced (smile, etc.)	You can use my stuffed body for the future of the Planet.	この作りモンの身体星の未来のために使わせてもらいましょ
ようは	要は	adv	in short, the point is	So that means you don't trust me?	ようは、信用でけんってことですな？
ボディー		n	body,body blow (in boxing)	There's plenty of stuffed toys like my body around, but there's only one me!	このおんなじボディのんがようさんおるんやけどこのボクは、ボクだけなんや！
かま	釜	n	iron pot, kettle	Don't forget me even if another CAIT SITH comes along.	新しいCAIT SITHがなかまになってもわすれんといてな
じたい	自体	adv	itself,one's own body, oneself,originally, naturally, by nature, from the start	So, this whole building is the Black Materia?	だから、この大きな建物自体が黒マテリア、なんだって
しかける	仕掛ける	v1, vt	to start, to begin, to commence,to challenge, to pick (a fight), to make (war),to set (traps), to plant (explosives), to lay (mines),to make a meld call	And inside it is a device, which gets smaller each time you solve a puzzle.	この模型には、しかけがあってパズルをといていくとどんどん模型が小さくなるんだって
パズル		n	puzzle	And inside it is a device, which gets smaller each time you solve a puzzle.	この模型には、しかけがあってパズルをといていくとどんどん模型が小さくなるんだって
おりたたむ	折り畳む	v5m, vt	to fold up, to fold into layers	As the model becomes smaller, you become smaller too. Until it's small enough to fit in the palm of your hand.	模型、小さくなると、神殿自体も小さくなる。どんどん、おりたたまれていって、最後には手のひらにのるくらいにまで小さくなるの
てのひら	手のひら	n	palm (of one's hand)	As the model becomes smaller, you become smaller too. Until it's small enough to fit in the palm of your hand.	模型、小さくなると、神殿自体も小さくなる。どんどん、おりたたまれていって、最後には手のひらにのるくらいにまで小さくなるの
おしつぶす	押しつぶす	v5s, vt	to squash, to crush, to flatten	So, anyone who solves the puzzle will be crushed by the Temple.	だから、パズルを解くと、その人はこの神殿、いいえ、黒マテリア自体に押しつぶされちゃうの
たる	樽	n	cask, barrel	I'm so exited. Right or wrong, I'm still the same 'ol me	わくわくしますなぁ～当たるも～CAIT SITH当たらぬも～CAIT SITH
しかい	司会	n	leading a meeting, presiding over a meeting, officiating at a ceremony, chairmanship,chairman, presenter, host, moderator, master of ceremonies	CLOUD, I'll be your matchmaker, preacher… I'll do whatever you want me to!	CLOUDさんボク、司会でも仲人でもスパイでもなんでもしますわ～
なこうど	仲人	n	matchmaker,go-between, intermediary, middleman, mediator, intercessor	CLOUD, I'll be your matchmaker, preacher… I'll do whatever you want me to!	CLOUDさんボク、司会でも仲人でもスパイでもなんでもしますわ～
おおきに	大きに	int	greatly, very much,thanks a lot	Thank you for believing in me, knowing that I was a spy.	スパイのボクのこと信じてくれて、おおきに！
いっぷく	一幅	n	(a) scroll	I'm gonna have a smoke out here!	ここでいっぷくしてるぜ！
まっしろ	真っ白	adj-na, adj-no, n	pure white,blank (e.g. mind, paper)	Everything is white…	まっしろだ……
みやこ	都	n	capital, metropolis, seat of government,capital (of music, fashion, etc.), city (e.g. of light),location of the Imperial Palace	This forest leads to the City of the Ancients… and is called the Sleeping Forest.	この森は【古代種の都】へつづく……【眠りの森】と呼ばれている
ちそう	地層	n	stratum, geological formation, layer, bed (coal, gravel, etc.)	[Empty Entry]	万年前の地層
なおさら	尚更	adv	still more, even more, all the more,still less, even less	Then we must go. What'll we do if something happens to AERIS? If Sephiroth finds her, she's in trouble.	それならなおさらよ。AERISにもしものことがあったらどうするの？セフィロスが気づいたら大変よ
げしゃ	下車	n, vs	alighting (from train, bus, etc.), getting off	But you gotta understand that there ain't no gettin' offa this train we're on, till we get to the end of the line.	でもよ、CLOUD。オレたちが乗っちまったこの列車はよ、途中下車はナシだぜ
だこ	唾壷	n	spittoon	People get depressed in life because they don't know what's up.	誰だって、わけわかんねえからあ～だこ～だ、なやむんだろ？
いたる	至る	v5r, vi	to arrive at (e.g. a decision), to reach (a stage), to attain,to lead to (a place), to get to,in the extreme case of,to come, to arrive, to result in	Either way, if you stay around here all you're gonna do is worry about it.	ま、どっちにしても、ここにいたってなやんで頭かかえてるしかねえぞ