わざと	態と	adv	on purpose	Why? Why didn't you try to duck?	なぜ？わざと、よけなかった……
ひょうが	氷河	n	glacier	There's no way they can climb the Great Glacier anyway.	どうせ、あの大氷河を越えられるはずがないわ
ほうりこむ	放り込む	v5m, vt	to throw into, to toss into	Put them in some house in the village.	どこかの家にほうりこんでおいて！
へいさ	閉鎖	n, vs	closing, closure, shutdown, lockout	This village is now under martial law!	この村は、しばらく閉鎖だ！
ぶっとばす	ぶっ飛ばす	v5s, vt	to knock (someone) to their feet, to knock down,to send flying, to strike, to fling, to fire,to drive away (one's sorrows, worries, etc.), to dispel,to drive at terrific speed, to barrel along	(Kick his butt)	（こいつをぶっとばす）
さける	避ける	v1	to avoid (physical contact with),to avoid (situation),to ward off, to avert	The President's gonna be there. So, would you please just lay low for a while?	本社から社長もいらっしゃる。混乱をさけるためだ。ガマンしてくれんか？
くだりざか	下り坂	n	descent, downhill, decline, waning	No, don't!! There's a steep grade, past here.	ダメダメ！！この先は、すごい下り坂なんだ
スノーボード		n, vs	snowboard, snowboarding	I guess I'm not too busy now. Do you want to learn how to ride a snowboard?	よし、ヒマだからスノーボードの乗り方を教えてやろうか？
さか	坂	n	slope, hill	Anyhow, you'll need a snowboard to get down that hill. Want to learn how to ride one?	それより、向こうの坂を下るにはスノーボードでもなければ無理だぜ。乗り方を教えてやろうか？
いきだおれ	行き倒れ	n	person collapsed and dying (dead) in the street	You won't make it without a snowboard and a map!!	スノーボードと地図がなければきっと、この先で行き倒れになってしまうぞ！！
はて	果て	n	the end, the extremity, the limit, the limits, the result	There's a barrier at the North end of the crater! You shouldn't go any further.	北の果てのクレーターにバリアが、はられているんだ！この先は、行かないほうがいいぜ
つきやぶる	突き破る	v5r, vt	to break through, to penetrate, to pierce	A bright light shattered the barrier at the crater! What in the world's goin' on!?	とっても、まぶしい光がクレーターのバリアを突き破ったんだ！いったい、何が起こっているんだ！？
ゆき	雪	n	snow	It seemed strange seeing the black cape in the snowy white.	なんだか、白い雪の中で黒いマントが動くのが不気味だったな
すべる	滑る	v5r, vi	to glide, to slide (e.g. on skis), to slip,to fail (an examination), to bomb (when telling a joke),to drop, to go down, to come down, to fall (e.g. in status)	Sledding's fun!	ソリすべりは、たのしいよ
かわせ	為替	n	money order, draft,exchange (e.g. foreign)	Dodge that punch!	パンチをかわせ！
ブレーキ		n	brake	Directional button [down]Brake	【方向キーの下】　　ブレーキ
きおん	気温	n	atmospheric temperature	I can't live in this town anymore. It gets so cold here!	気温がとても下がってしまってもう、この町には住めそうにないの
ひっこし	引っ越し	n, vs	moving (dwelling, office, etc.), changing residence	I have to move again… I don't know where to start.	また、引っ越ししなくちゃ……でも、何から手をつけていいのやら？
ドーム		n	dome	The reason for the drop in temperature must be because of that dome of light at the Northern limits…	こんなに気温が下がったのは北の果てにできた光のドームのせいにちがいないんだ……
とざん	登山	n, vs	mountain climbing	The master is an experienced climber, you know.	この家のおじぃさんは登山家だそうなの
おば	伯母	n	aunt	Grandma, don't sleep so close to the fire!	おばぁちゃん火の近くで眠っちゃダメよ！
かぜ	風邪	n	common cold, cold, influenza, flu, ague	Grandma's been sick for a while and doesn't have much energy…	おばぁちゃん、カゼぎみでねこのごろ元気がないのよ……
ぎみ	気味	n-suf	-like, -looking, -looked, tending to ...	Grandma's been sick for a while and doesn't have much energy…	おばぁちゃん、カゼぎみでねこのごろ元気がないのよ……
ついつい		adv	unintentionally, unconsciously, by mistake, heedlessly, against one's better judgement (judgment)	I just get SO comfortable.	ついつい、イイ気持ちになってね
だんな	旦那	n	master (of a house, shop, etc.),husband (informal),sir, boss, master, governor, [object Object],patron of a mistress, geisha, bar or nightclub hostess, sugar daddy,alms, almsgiving, almsgiver	My husband left 20 years ago and still hasn't come back.	私のダンナは２０年前にでかけたきりでまだ帰ってこないのよ
ばつ		n	x-mark,impossibility, futility, uselessness	He should at least be at the foot of Gaea's Cliff. It's marked with a check on the map…	地図に書いてあるペケ印のガイアの絶壁のふもとまで行っているばずなんだけど
ガイア		n	Gaia (Greek goddess), Gaea	He should at least be at the foot of Gaea's Cliff. It's marked with a check on the map…	地図に書いてあるペケ印のガイアの絶壁のふもとまで行っているばずなんだけど
ぜっぺき	絶壁	n	precipice, cliff,flat head	He should at least be at the foot of Gaea's Cliff. It's marked with a check on the map…	地図に書いてあるペケ印のガイアの絶壁のふもとまで行っているばずなんだけど
なんぽう	南方	n	the south, southward, southern direction,countries in the south (esp. Southeast Asia and the pre-WWII South Pacific Mandate)	I heard there's a doctor on a Southern island somewhere. I sure wish he'd come here…cough…cough…	南方の島にお医者さんがいるそうなんだけどこの町にも来てくれんかねぇ……ゴホゴホ
ごほごほ		adv, adv-to	coughing, hacking cough	I heard there's a doctor on a Southern island somewhere. I sure wish he'd come here…cough…cough…	南方の島にお医者さんがいるそうなんだけどこの町にも来てくれんかねぇ……ゴホゴホ
ちゃっかり		adv, adv-to, vs	shrewd, smart, calculating, astute, sharp, cunning	What nerve! You already tore down the map.	おっ、ちゃっかりしてるなあ！もう地図をはがしてるんだな
はがす	剥がす	v5s, vt	to tear off, to peel off, to rip off, to strip off, to skin, to flay, to disrobe, to deprive of, to detach, to disconnect	What nerve! You already tore down the map.	おっ、ちゃっかりしてるなあ！もう地図をはがしてるんだな
ワクチン		n, adj-no	vaccine	Received "Vaccine"!	『ワクチン』を手にいれた！
きたん	忌憚	n, vs	reserve, modesty	We came from Costa del Sol to snowboard, but we're just about to leave!	あたしたちぃ～コスタ・デル・ソルから～スノボしにきたんだけどぉ～もう、帰っちゃうのよ！
バーテン		n	bartender	Bartender	バーテン
ゆきおんな	雪女	n	snow woman	I've heard there's a snow woman at the Great Glacier that hates hot springs…	なんでも、この村の北の大氷河には温泉ぎらいの雪女がいるらしいとか……
めいしん	迷信	n, adj-no, vs	superstition, superstitious belief	But I think it's just a myth to scare off visitors.	いやぁ、これは旅人を驚かせるためのたんなる迷信だと思うんですがね
つかる	浸かる	v5r, vi	to be submerged, to be soaked,to be pickled, to be well seasoned,to be totally immersed (in a condition, e.g. laziness)	What an idiot. Is he thinkin' 'bout going to that hot spring?	バカだよな、あの温泉にでもつかりに行くつもりなのかな？
おおむかし	大昔	n-adv, n-t	great antiquity, old-fashioned, long ago	Something huge must've fallen from the sky a long time ago!	大昔に空から何かが降ってきたにちがいないよ！
ビデオ		n	video	Play the Video?	ビデオを再生しますか？
さいせい	再生	n, vs, adj-no	resuscitation, regeneration, restoration to life,reformation, rehabilitation,playback, regeneration (sound, etc.), view (of a video clip),reclamation, recovery,rebirth, reincarnation	Play the Video?	ビデオを再生しますか？
プライベート		n	private,privacy	Confidential	プライベート
せいご	生後	n-adv, n-t	post-natal, since birth	Daughter's Record: 10th Day after birth	娘の記録・生後１０日め
よみ	読み	n	reading	Ifalna, what exactly does Planet-reading entail?	イファルナさん星読みとは、どういうことなのですか？
ゆきどけ	雪解け	n, vs	snow thaw, thawing	Hmm, even here so close to the North Cave, the snow never melts. Is that because the Planet's energy is gathered here to heal its injury?	ふむ、北の大空洞に近いこの地に雪どけの時期がこないのは星の傷にエネルギーが集中しているからなのか
じき	時期	n	time, season, period, phase, stage	Hmm, even here so close to the North Cave, the snow never melts. Is that because the Planet's energy is gathered here to heal its injury?	ふむ、北の大空洞に近いこの地に雪どけの時期がこないのは星の傷にエネルギーが集中しているからなのか
およそ	凡そ	n, adj-no	about, roughly, approximately,generally, on the whole, as a rule,completely, quite, entirely, altogether, totally, not at all (with neg. verb),outline, gist	2000 years ago, our ancestors, the Cetra, heard the cries of the Planet.	およそ２０００年前わたしたちセトラの祖先はこの星の悲鳴を聞いたそうです
そせん	祖先	n	ancestor	2000 years ago, our ancestors, the Cetra, heard the cries of the Planet.	およそ２０００年前わたしたちセトラの祖先はこの星の悲鳴を聞いたそうです
ひょうげん	表現	n, vs	expression, presentation,representation, notation	…I can't explain it very well, but it's like having a conversation with the Planet…	……うまく表現できませんけど星と対話することなのです……
たいわ	対話	n, vs, adj-no	dialogue, discussion, conversation, interaction	…I can't explain it very well, but it's like having a conversation with the Planet…	……うまく表現できませんけど星と対話することなのです……
たやす	絶やす	v5s, vt	to exterminate, to eradicate, to wipe out, to put an end to,to let (fire) go out, to let die (e.g. flowers), to run out of	The Cetra tried desperately to cultivate the land so as not to diminish the needed energy…	セトラたちは必要とされるエネルギーを絶やさぬために必死で土地を育てようとしたのですが……
ひっし	必死	n	frantic, frenetic, desperate,inevitable death,brinkmate (inevitable checkmate)	The Cetra tried desperately to cultivate the land so as not to diminish the needed energy…	セトラたちは必要とされるエネルギーを絶やさぬために必死で土地を育てようとしたのですが……
ついやす	費やす	v5s, vt	to spend, to expend, to consume,to waste, to squander, to throw away,to devote	Yes, the energy that was needed to heal the Planet withered away the land…then the Planet…	ええ、傷の回復に費やすエネルギーは急速に土地を枯れさせ…そして星は…
きゅうそく	急速	adj-na, n	rapid (e.g. progress)	Yes, the energy that was needed to heal the Planet withered away the land…then the Planet…	ええ、傷の回復に費やすエネルギーは急速に土地を枯れさせ…そして星は…
すすめる	勧める	v1, vt	to recommend (someone to do), to advise, to encourage, to urge,to recommend (a book, someone for a position, etc.), to suggest,to offer (a drink, cigarette, seat, etc.)	The Planet tried to persuade the Cetra to leave the Knowlespole, but…	星はセトラにノルズポルから離れるようにすすめたそうです…でも
たびだち	旅立ち	n, vs	setting off (on a trip)	I'm all right… When the Cetra…were preparing to part with the land they loved…	だいじょうぶです…セトラたちが…長年親しんだ土地から旅立ちの準備をしていたとき……
ウイルス		adj-no	virus,viral	The Cetra were attacked by the virus and went mad… transforming into monsters.	ウィルスに侵されたセトラたちは心を失い……そしてモンスターと化しました
おかす	侵す	v5s, vt	to invade, to raid, to violate (airspace, etc.), to intrude, to trespass,to infringe, to encroach,to harm, to afflict, to affect	The Cetra were attacked by the virus and went mad… transforming into monsters.	ウィルスに侵されたセトラたちは心を失い……そしてモンスターと化しました
かす	化す	v5s, vi	to change into, to convert to, to transform, to be reduced, to influence, to improve (someone)	The Cetra were attacked by the virus and went mad… transforming into monsters.	ウィルスに侵されたセトラたちは心を失い……そしてモンスターと化しました
あに	兄	n	elder brother, older brother	That's when it appeared!	その時、そのものは現れたのです！その姿は、亡き母の…亡き兄のものでした。それぞれに過去の幻影を見せるのです
あざむく	欺く	v5k, vt	to deceive, to delude, to trick, to fool,to be as ... as ... (e.g. "as bright as day", "as beautiful as a rose")	It looked like…our…our dead mothers …and our dead brothers. Showing us specters of their past.	その者は親しげな顔でセトラたちに近づき…あざむき…そして……ウィルスを…ウィルスを与えたのです
ぶぞく	部族	n, adj-no	tribe, clan, house	It first approached as a friend, deceived them, and finally… gave them the virus.	その者は、ノルズポルと同じように別のセトラの部族に近づき………そしてまた…ウィルスを……
しょうすう	少数	n, adj-no	minority, few	Yes, Professor.	少数の生き残ったセトラたちがジェノバに討ち勝ち、そして封印したのです
ごかい	誤解	n, vs	misunderstanding	I don't know… I can't hear the voice of the Planet well…	博士がセトラだと誤解した者……ジェノバと名づけた者こそが……空から来た厄災なのです
わがや	我が家	exp, n	one's house, one's home, one's family	Who could that-? I was just about to…	我が家のくつろぎの時間にまったく……
くすのき	樟	n	camphor tree (Cinnamomum camphora), camphorwood, camphor laurel	I feel so much better now, darling.	クスクス……ええ、そうね
とうに	疾うに	adv	long ago, a long time ago, already	Heh, heh, heh I've been searching for you, Ifalna… or should I say, Cetra!	いやぁ、骨をおりました。あなたたちが、ここにいることぐらいとうにわかってたんですよ
ねんかん	年間	n-suf	(period of) a year,during an era	Long time no see, Professor Gast!	でもね……２年間待ちました。私は新しいサンプルがほしかったんですよ……クックックッ
わがこ	我が子	exp, n	one's own child, one's own children	Oh, I'm thinking of taping it on video.  But, the video's not working right…	いえ、そんなことではないです。カワイイわが子をとるんですよ
テープ		n	tape	I've already decided! If it's a girl, then it'll be AERIS. That's that!	でしょ！？あっ、ビデオのテープがっ…………
とびこす	飛び越す	v5s, vt	to leap over	I guess we're still in one piece.	なんとか、飛び越したようだな
ずれる		v1, vi	to slide, to slip off, to get dislocated, to be out of alignment, to get dislodged, to deviate, to shift (position), to be out of sync., to be slightly off, to be off-point	I'm a little off.	ちと、ずれたかな
みてくれ	見てくれ	n	appearance, outward show	We should check it on the map. Press the [SWITCH].	地図で確認すべきだな。□ボタンで見てくれ
こごえる	凍える	v1, vi	to freeze (of one's body), to be frozen, to become numb (with cold), to be chilled	It sure is cold. We'll freeze if we stay here any longer.	それにしても、ものすごい寒さだあまり長くここにいるとこごえてしまうな
こおる	凍る	v5r, vi	to freeze, to be frozen over, to congeal	This is the only place not frozen.	ここだけ凍っていないな
ちかよる	近寄る	v5r, vi	to approach, to draw near	And don't come back again.	もう近寄らないでください
ことに	殊に	adv	especially, particularly, unusually, above all,additionally	Why this?	なんてことに……
つっぱしる	突っ走る	v5r, vi	to run swiftly, to dash, to rush, to race	We're outta here!	つっぱしる
すみつく	住み着く	v5k, vi	to settle (in a place), to settle down	Oh, I'm sorry, my name is Holzoff. I've lived here for 20 years.	おっと失礼！　わたしの名は、ホルゾフ。この地に住みついて、もう２０年だ
やまおとこ	山男	n	giant, woodsman, alpinist	Do you mind hearing some stories from a lonely climber?	よければ、向こうの部屋でさびしい山男の独り言を聞いてくれんか？
ひとりごと	独り言	n	soliloquy, monologue, speaking to oneself	Do you mind hearing some stories from a lonely climber?	よければ、向こうの部屋でさびしい山男の独り言を聞いてくれんか？
たちばなし	立ち話	n	talking while standing, standing around talking	Why don't we go to the next room and sit down.	立ち話もなんだから向こうの部屋に行こう
たいおん	体温	n	temperature, body temperature (human, animal)	…And you have to keep your body temperature normal. Don't forget these 2 things.	下がった体温を回復させること。これらを忘れてはいけないぞ
コレラ	虎列剌	n	cholera	…And you have to keep your body temperature normal. Don't forget these 2 things.	下がった体温を回復させること。これらを忘れてはいけないぞ
むちゃ	無茶	adv	absurd, unreasonable, excessive, rash,very, extremely, excessively	Don't overdo it.	むちゃをしてはいけないぞ
いどむ	挑む	v5m, vi	to challenge to (a fight, game, etc.), to throw down the gauntlet, to contend for,to tackle (e.g. a problem), to attempt, to go after (a prize, record, etc.),to pressure (someone) for sex, to make advances to	You ever hear about those who challenged the cliff?	君たちは絶壁に挑んだ男たちの話を聞いたことがあるかい？
さむけ	寒気	n	chill, the shivers, shivering fit,cold, coldness, cold air	That cliff has a biting cold wind that lowers your body temperature.	あの絶壁には、すさまじい寒気が嵐のようにうず巻いているんだ。寒気が体温をどんどん奪っていく
あらし	嵐	n	storm, tempest,storm, hullaballoo, uproar, winds (e.g. of change)	That cliff has a biting cold wind that lowers your body temperature.	あの絶壁には、すさまじい寒気が嵐のようにうず巻いているんだ。寒気が体温をどんどん奪っていく
うずまく	渦巻く	v5k, vi	to whirl, to eddy, to swirl, to curl (smoke),to be all jumbled together (feelings, thoughts, etc.),to surge, to sweep	That cliff has a biting cold wind that lowers your body temperature.	あの絶壁には、すさまじい寒気が嵐のようにうず巻いているんだ。寒気が体温をどんどん奪っていく
ザイル		n	climbing rope (i.e. for mountaineering)	Yamski was below me. He cut his own rope…	わたしの下を登っていたヤマスキーは自分でザイルを切って……
ていきょう	提供	n, vs	offer, tender, providing, supplying, making available, donating (blood, organs, etc.),sponsoring (a TV program)	I've lived here ever since… challenging the cliff and providing warning and shelter to my fellow climbers.	以来わたしは、この地に移り絶壁に挑みつづけ、同じ仲間に注意と、ほんの少しの休息を提供しているんだよ
たな	棚	n	shelf, shelves, ledge, rack,trellis	Second, warm yourselves up once you get to a ledge.	２つめは絶壁の途中のタナに着いたら必ず下がった体温を回復させること
べん	弁	n	speech, tongue, talk, eloquence,dialect, brogue, accent,bento, [object Object],petal,valve,Oversight Department, [object Object]	But, if anyone ever told me to live here, I'd tell them to…well, you know…	こんなところに住めって言われたらオレは、迷わずカンベンしてくれって答えるぜ……
くふう	工夫	n, vs	scheme, device, scheming, devising, figuring out, coming up with, solving ingeniously,dedication to spiritual improvement (esp. through Zen meditation)	I tell you one thing though, If I did have to live here I'd change things around 'n' make it better.	でも、もし住むことになったらきっと、いろいろ工夫して居心地よくしようとすると思うんだ
いごこち	居心地	n	comfort	I tell you one thing though, If I did have to live here I'd change things around 'n' make it better.	でも、もし住むことになったらきっと、いろいろ工夫して居心地よくしようとすると思うんだ
ゆきつく	行き着く	v5k, vi	to arrive at, to end up	I guess Midgar is the total opposite of this place.	そんな人間の工夫の行き着いたところが…………ミッドガルなのか
ふぶき	吹雪	n	snow storm, blizzard	Gotta keep telling myself this blizzard's okay…brr	こんな吹雪なんて、へっちゃらよ！そうでも言ってないと……もう……
もり	守り	n	babysitting, babysitter,protecting, keeping, keeper	Received "Protection Ring"!	『守りの指輪』を手にいれた！
いきどまり	行き止まり	n	dead end, cul-de-sac, blind alley, no through road (i.e. on signage),end, end of the road, end point, as far as one can go	Dead end.	行き止まりだ
れっか	烈火	n	raging fire, conflagration	Received "Fire Armlet"!	『烈火の腕輪』を手にいれた！