りょう	量	n, n-suf	quantity, amount, volume, portion (of food)	So all this energy's gathered here for the Planet to heal itself?	ここのスゲエ量のエネルギーは星の傷を治すために集まってるわけか
はれる	腫れる	v1, vi	to swell (from inflammation), to become swollen	I'll gather everybody, so you go on ahead.	みんなを呼びに行きますよって先に行っとくんなはれ
たつまき	竜巻	n, adj-no	tornado, waterspout	Whirlwind Maze	竜巻の迷宮
めいきゅう	迷宮	n	labyrinth, maze,mystery	Whirlwind Maze	竜巻の迷宮
かい	改	n-suf	revision	Received "Neo Bahamut" Materia!	『バハムート改』のマテリアを手にいれた！
さがしもとめる	捜し求める	v1, vt	to search for, to seek for, to look for	This is the Promised Land the President had been searching for!!	まさにプレジデントがさがしもとめた約束の地！！
しゅうちゃく	終着	n	arriving at the final stop (of a bus, train, etc.), reaching the end of the line	It's where the Reunion will take place… They will all gather here…	……リユニオンの終着点。……みんな集まれ、か
きりゅう	気流	n	atmospheric current, air current, airflow	We need to cross when the wind is calm, or we'll get swept off!	気流がおさまるタイミングを見て渡らないとはじき飛ばされちゃうわ！
はじきとばす	はじき飛ばす	v5s, vt	to flick off, to give ... the flick, to send something flying, to hit (a person), to knock down	We need to cross when the wind is calm, or we'll get swept off!	気流がおさまるタイミングを見て渡らないとはじき飛ばされちゃうわ！
さいぼう	細胞	n, adj-no	cell	Jenova's cells…	ジェノバ細胞……
あほ	阿呆	n, adj-na	fool, idiot, simpleton	Vanished? That can't be!	き、きえてしまうなんて…そんなアホな！
にくたい	肉体	n, adj-no	the body, the flesh	What I wanted was a body. A seeing, hearing, moving body. Soon it will be…over.	……欲しかったのは身体見、聞き、話し、移動する肉体。まもなく……終わる
うど	独活	n	udo (plant related to ginseng, used in medicine and cooking) (Aralia cordata)	BARRET	クラウド
まっくら	真っ暗	adj-na, n	total darkness, pitch dark,bleak future, poor prospects	Something's weird here! It got pitch black all of a sudden, and everyone disappeared!	なんか様子が変なんだよ！真っ暗になっちまってみんないなくなっちまった！
おくそこ	奥底	n	depths, bottom (of one's heart)	But it's releasing a powerfully strong will from deep within the Planet's wound.	しかし、とほうもなく強い意志をこの星の傷の奥底から放っている
たいき	待機	n, vs	standing by, awaiting an opportunity, being on alert	We're going in first! You guys stay and keep watch.	オレたちは先に行く！みんなは待機していてくれ
じゅうだい	重大	adj-na, n	serious, important, significant, grave, weighty	Damn! The pressure's on now.	おっと！　責任重大だぜ
げんかく	幻覚	n	hallucination, illusion	Why, is it an illusion?	……なぜだ……幻覚か？
ぬけだす	抜け出す	v5s, vi	to slip out, to sneak away, to break free, to get through (a difficult situation),to break into the lead, to get ahead,to begin to fall out (e.g. hair),to break out (of a loop)	Is this illusion going to continue forever? How do we get out of it?	この幻はず～っと続くの？どうやって抜け出すの？
げんそう	幻想	n	fantasy, illusion, vision, dream	We were in an illusion…	あ、幻想の中だった……
ナンバリング		n	numbering,numbering machine	An incomplete Sephiroth-clone. Not even given a number. …That is your reality.	セフィロス・コピー・インコンプリート。ナンバリング無し。それがおまえの真実
うらはら	裏腹	adj-na, n	opposite, reverse, contrary	Why are you so worried and scared by those words?	その言葉とはうらはらにおまえは何をおびえている？
あやふや		adj-na, n	uncertain, vague, ambiguous	There's a lot of things muddled up in my memories.	記憶だってあやふやな部分がたくさんあるんだ
げんどう	言動	n	speech and conduct, words and deeds	The ability to change one's looks, voice, and words, is the power of Jenova.	他人の記憶にあわせて自分の姿、声、言動を変化させるのはジェノバの能力だ
にりゅう	二流	n, adj-no	second-rate, inferior	It is that kind of dullness that makes you a second-rate scientist.	そのカタさが二流科学者の限界だな
レポート		n, vs	report, paper	That's what was stated in Professor Gast's report.	ガスト博士のレポートにはそう記されていたな
しるす	記す	v5s	to write down, to note, to jot down,to remember	That's what was stated in Professor Gast's report.	ガスト博士のレポートにはそう記されていたな
かくしごと	隠し事	n	secret	You keep a lot of things to yourself.	君は隠し事が多いな
おえる	負える	v1	to be able to bear,to be able to manage	This place is going to get rough.	ここはあんたたちの手には負えない
プレッシャー		n	pressure	Okay then, here. Had a lot of pressure holding this thing.	じゃあ、これ。すげえプレッシャーだったぜ
パーフェクト		n	perfect, perfection,perfect game	It means that my experiment was a complete success.	私の実験がパーフェクトに成功したわけだな
こたい	個体	n, adj-no	individual, specimen	I never dreamed what I thought was a success…was actually a failure, and that which I considered a failure was my greatest success…	私が成功とみなした個体が失敗……失敗と判定したおまえが最も優れていたとは……
はんてい	判定	n, vs	judgement, judgment, decision, adjudication, award, verdict, determination	I never dreamed what I thought was a success…was actually a failure, and that which I considered a failure was my greatest success…	私が成功とみなした個体が失敗……失敗と判定したおまえが最も優れていたとは……
すぐれる	優れる	v1, vi	to surpass, to outstrip, to excel	I never dreamed what I thought was a success…was actually a failure, and that which I considered a failure was my greatest success…	私が成功とみなした個体が失敗……失敗と判定したおまえが最も優れていたとは……
のち	後	n, adj-no	later, afterwards, since,future,after one's death,descendant	This is perfect! Both Jenova's Reunion and Sephiroth's  will!	素晴らしい！ジェノバのリユニオンとセフィロスの意志のちから！
かくさん	拡散	n, vs, adj-no	scattering, diffusion, spread (e.g. signal across the spectrum)	They won't be diffused into the Lifestream, but gathered here!	ライフストリームに拡散することなくここに結集したのだ！
けっしゅう	結集	n, vs	concentration (of efforts, forces, etc.), gathering together, regimentation, marshalling, mobilization	They won't be diffused into the Lifestream, but gathered here!	ライフストリームに拡散することなくここに結集したのだ！
ちょくご	直後	n-adv, n-t	immediately following	…He's a Sephiroth-clone I created after the real Sephiroth died five years ago.	……５年前、セフィロスが死んだ直後に私が創ったセフィロス・コピーのひとつ
ひらめく	閃く	v5k, vi	to flash (e.g. lightning), to flicker, to glitter, to sparkle, to gleam,to flutter (e.g. flag), to wave, to undulate,to flash into one's mind (e.g. an idea), to come to one suddenly	Jenova cells and Mako, with my knowledge and skills, have been combined with science and nature to bring him to life.	ジェノバ細胞と魔晄、それにくわえて私の知識、技術、ひらめきが生み出した科学と神秘の生命、セフィロス・コピー
しょうめい	証明	n, vs, adj-no	proof, verification, certification	…I'm not wild about the failure part, but the Jenova Reunion Theory has now been proven.	……失敗作だというのが気に入らないがジェノバのリユニオン仮説は証明された
バラバラ		adj-na, adj-no, adv, vs	scattered, disperse, loose, disconnected, in pieces, in drops, rustling	You see, even if Jenova's body is dismembered, it will eventually become one again. That's what is meant by Jenova's Reunion.	ジェノバは身体をバラバラにされてもやがてひとつの場所に集結し再生する。これがジェノバの『リユニオン』だ
しゅうけつ	集結	n, vs	massing (of troops), gathering	You see, even if Jenova's body is dismembered, it will eventually become one again. That's what is meant by Jenova's Reunion.	ジェノバは身体をバラバラにされてもやがてひとつの場所に集結し再生する。これがジェノバの『リユニオン』だ
うごきだす	動き出す	v5s	to come alive, to get going, to start to move	I have been waiting for the Reunion to start. Five years have passed, and now the clones have begun to return.	リユニオンの始まりを私は待った。５年がすぎ……コピーたちは動き出した
てんさい	天才	n	genius, prodigy, natural gift	But being the genius that I am, I soon figured it out. You see it was all Sephiroth's doing.	……私は天才だ、すぐにわかった。セフィロスの仕業だ
にくしみ	憎しみ	n	hatred	All the anger and hatred I bore him, made it impossible for me to ever forget him. That and what he gave me.	セフィロスへの怒りと憎しみ。それは俺がセフィロスのこと、忘れないようにとセフィロスがくれたおくりもの……
きっかけ	切っ掛け	n	chance, start, cue, excuse, motive, impetus, occasion	You joined SOLDIER but quit after the Sephiroth incident, and now you're a mercenary…	希望どおりにソルジャーになったことセフィロスの事件をきっかけにやめてしまったこと、何でも屋をやっていること……