めざめ	目覚め	n	waking	We can't do a damn thing about it. We just gotta wait till he wakes up.	オレたちには手も足も出せねえ。ただ目覚めの時を待つってだけさ
あばれる	暴れる	v1, vi	to act violently, to rage, to struggle, to be riotous	On top of that, some huge monster called Weapon's been on the rampage.	しかもよ、ウェポンとかいう巨大モンスターがあばれてやがる
おはらい	御祓い	n	exorcism rite, purification	Meteor has been summoned… Essentially, it's all but over now.	メテオを呼んでしまった今となってはおはらいばこのようだな
しょけい	処刑	n, vs	execution	President! Preparations for the public execution are complete.	社長！処刑の準備がととのいました
ととのう	整う	v5u, vi	to be ready, to be prepared, to be arranged,to be in order, to be put in order, to be well-ordered, to be well-proportioned, to be harmonious,to be adjusted, to be regulated, to be refined (e.g. of a face),to be settled (e.g. treaty, contract), to be completed	President! Preparations for the public execution are complete.	社長！処刑の準備がととのいました
しばる	縛る	v5r, vt	to tie, to bind, to fasten,to restrict (freedom), to tie down (with rules, regulations, etc.), to fetter	I'll tie your arms now.	腕をしばらせてもらおうか
まっすぐ	真っ直ぐ	adj-na, n	straight (ahead), direct, upright, erect,straightforward, honest, frank	Hey! Walk straight!	こら！　まっすぐ進め！
あつまり	集まり	n	gathering, meeting, assembly, collection, attendance	Is everyone here? These are the ones who brought this madness to the world!	みなさんお集まりになった？この者たちが世界をこんな混乱に落としめた張本人たちよ！
ちょうほんにん	張本人	n	originator, ringleader, perpetrator, main culprit, person responsible	Is everyone here? These are the ones who brought this madness to the world!	みなさんお集まりになった？この者たちが世界をこんな混乱に落としめた張本人たちよ！
ノブ		n	knob,doorknob	We will be broadcasting your miserable deaths live on national television.	あなたたちのぶざまな死にざまをテレビで全国中継するのよ
ぜんこく	全国	n, adj-no	countrywide, nationwide, whole country, national	We will be broadcasting your miserable deaths live on national television.	あなたたちのぶざまな死にざまをテレビで全国中継するのよ
こうかい	公開	n, vs, adj-no	opening to the public, making available to the public, putting on display, exhibiting, showing (play, movie, etc.), holding (interview, etc.), open, public	Scarlet, why a public execution in this day and age?	スカーレットさん。なぜ今回はこのような公開処刑を？
ベスト		n	best,vest	With the chaos resulting from the Meteor reports, we desperately need to rally public support… it's better that we punish somebody, anybody.	メテオで混乱した民衆をまとめるには誰か一人、悪者をつくるのがベストなのよね
ガス	瓦斯	n	gas (state of matter, e.g. poison gas, natural gas),gasoline, gas, petrol,dense fog, thick fog,gas stove, gas cooker, gas range,flatulence, gas, wind, fart	This is my special gas chamber. Take your time and enjoy a slow painful death.	私の特製ガスルームよ。じっくり時間をかけて思う存分苦しんでちょうだいね
ルーム		n	room	This is my special gas chamber. Take your time and enjoy a slow painful death.	私の特製ガスルームよ。じっくり時間をかけて思う存分苦しんでちょうだいね
おもうぞんぶん	思う存分	exp, adv	to one's heart's content	This is my special gas chamber. Take your time and enjoy a slow painful death.	私の特製ガスルームよ。じっくり時間をかけて思う存分苦しんでちょうだいね
こじあける	抉じ開ける	v1, vt	to wrench open, to prize open, to pick (lock)	Don't make me pry it open!	こじあけてやるわ！
てあし	手足	n	hands and feet, limbs	Move your feet and arms, then use your	手足を動かし、頭を働かせて
はたらかせる	働かせる	v1	to put someone to work, to make someone work,to use, to apply, to exert, to exercise (restraint, one's imagination, one's brain, etc.)	Move your feet and arms, then use your	手足を動かし、頭を働かせて
ひだりて	左手	n, adj-no	left hand,left-hand side, left-hand direction, (on) the left	[SWITCH]…(R Arm)[OK]…(L Arm)	□ボタン　…　【右手】　　○ボタン　…　【左手】
ワンパターン		n, adj-no	predictable, repetitive, being in a rut, set in one's ways	Try different patterns.	ワンパターンではだめ
しゅうらい	襲来	n, vs	invasion, raid, attack, visitation (of a calamity)	Weapon's approaching! Attention all military personnel: take your positions!	ウェポン襲来！総員戦闘配備！
しけい	死刑	n	death penalty, capital punishment	Let's just say I'm against capital punishment. Besides…I hate this broad. Come on, we gotta help TIFA.	死刑には反対なんです。この女も嫌いやし。さ、はよTIFAさん助けんと
いっぺん	一変	n, vs	complete change, about-face	Hmm, we gotta go with a different plan. Let's get out of this room first.	しゃあない、作戦チェンジですわ。いっぺんこの部屋から出ましょ
ばか	馬鹿	n	fool, idiot,trivial matter, folly, absurdity,foolish, stupid, dull, absurd, ridiculous,Mactra chinensis (species of trough shell)	…Fools… I've already pushed the switch…	……ばか……め……もうスイッチは……押しちゃったわよ……
チック		suf	pomade (in stick form),tic,-tic	Goddammit!!	チックしょーー！！
またまた	又々	adv	again (and again), once again	OK, OK time for Plan B. Let's run to the airport!	むむぅ～、またまた作戦チェンジですな。エアポートまで走るで！
かや	蚊帳	n	mosquito net	Trust me, trust me. We gotta take a chance.	ええから、ええからこないなったらイチかバチかや
インタビュー		n, vs	interview (i.e. television, newspaper, etc.)	I know you're in a hurry! But, may have a word…	お急ぎのところすみません！ちょっとインタビューを……
やけに		adv	awfully, frightfully, desperately, violently, unduly, extremely	There's been so many attacks lately. Can we handle it?	最近やけに多いな。防げるか？
くらわせる	食らわせる	v1, vt	to make someone eat,to deal (a blow), to play (a trick)	We'll give it a shot from our big cannon.	じまんの大砲を一発くらわせます
ほうもん	砲門	n	gunport, embrasure, muzzle	Open cannon doors!! Activate cannon. Target: Weapon!!	全砲門ひらけ！！キャノン砲修正、目標ウェポン！！
ひらける	開ける	v1, vi	to open out (of a view, scenery, etc.), to spread out, to become clear (of a road, visibility, etc.), to open up,to improve (of luck, prospects, etc.), to get better,to develop (of a town, civilization, etc.), to become civilized, to modernize, to grow, to advance (of knowledge, ideas, etc.),to be sensible, to be understanding, to be enlightened,to open (of a new road, railway, etc.), to be opened to traffic,to become populous, to become densely built, to become bustling	Open cannon doors!! Activate cannon. Target: Weapon!!	全砲門ひらけ！！キャノン砲修正、目標ウェポン！！
しゅうせい	修正	n, vs	amendment, correction, revision, modification, alteration, retouching, update, fix	Open cannon doors!! Activate cannon. Target: Weapon!!	全砲門ひらけ！！キャノン砲修正、目標ウェポン！！
せっきん	接近	n, vs	getting closer, drawing nearer, approaching,being not much different, being near (age, skill, etc.),becoming close (i.e. friendly), becoming intimate	Weapon approaching!	ウェポン接近！
ノット		pref	knot,NOT,not	Speed, 50 Knots!	速度５０ノット！
つうじょう	通常	adj-no, n-adv, n-t	usual, ordinary, normal, regular, general, common	Then use regular fire power in the meantime!	それまで通常兵器で時間をかせげ！
ごっこ		suf	playing at (something), game of make-believe, something done together	Our little game of hide and seek ends here.	オニごっこはここまでよ
すいめん	水面	n	water's surface	The execution may have been unsuccessful, but your death by falling and crashing into the water below might still be pretty exciting.	ガス処刑は無理だったけどここから落ちて水面にたたきつけられて死ぬってのもス・テ・キ、かもしれないわね
おかえし	お返し	n, vs	return gift, return favour (favor),revenge,change (in a cash transaction)	Pay back!!	お返し！！
ぱんぱん		n	kapow, bang, slap, clap,bulging, filled to bursting,prostitute (esp. just after WWII)	Quit slapping me! You old $*&^%!!! (Push [OK]!)	さっきからパンパンいたいのよ！この年増女！！！！（○ボタンを押せ！）
としま	年増	n	mature woman, middle-aged woman	Quit slapping me! You old $*&^%!!! (Push [OK]!)	さっきからパンパンいたいのよ！この年増女！！！！（○ボタンを押せ！）
ぼやぼや		adv, adv-to	to be careless, to be inattentive, to be absentminded, to be slow,long and disheveled (e.g. hair) (dishevelled),flaring up (fire), rising (e.g. steam)	Why are you still standing there!? Catch her and take her away!	何をぼやぼやしているの？！つかまえて連れていきなさい！
ウインド		n	wind	Highwind	ハイウインド
ざつだん	雑談	n, vs	chatting, idle talk	Fly Airship	雑談でも
ちゃくりく	着陸	n, vs	landing, alighting, touch down	[ASSIST] to move ahead	【キャンセルボタン】着陸
あこがれ	憧れ	n, adj-no	yearning, longing, aspiration	We put up with this all the time, even when he beat us.	あこがれのハイウインドのクルーになれたのにそんなことでやめるのは悔しいですからね
あるひ	ある日	n, exp	one day (e.g. "one day while studying, ..")	I mean, I finally made it on the crew of the famous Highwind, and there's no way I was going to quit over him.	そんなある日……たしか、７日前でしたよね。北の大空洞行きの任務の時です
おおぞら	大空	n	heavens, firmament, sky	I mean, I finally made it on the crew of the famous Highwind, and there's no way I was going to quit over him.	そんなある日……たしか、７日前でしたよね。北の大空洞行きの任務の時です
ほら	洞	n	hollow, cavity, hole, cave	I mean, I finally made it on the crew of the famous Highwind, and there's no way I was going to quit over him.	そんなある日……たしか、７日前でしたよね。北の大空洞行きの任務の時です
かじ	火事	n	fire, conflagration	And that's why we decided to help.	大空洞からジュノンに着いたときボクは火事だ火事だと騒ぎました
さわぐ	騒ぐ	v5g, vi	to make noise, to make racket, to be noisy,to rustle, to swoosh,to make merry,to clamor, to clamour, to make a fuss, to kick up a fuss,to lose one's cool, to panic, to act flustered,to feel tense, to be uneasy, to be excited	And that's why we decided to help.	大空洞からジュノンに着いたときボクは火事だ火事だと騒ぎました
ひあい	日間	n	number of days, period of days,daily interest rate	But BARRET and you were captured by Heidegger…	７日間、救出のチャンスをうかがってついに実行に移しました
きゅうしゅつ	救出	n, vs	rescue, extricate, reclaim, deliverance	But BARRET and you were captured by Heidegger…	７日間、救出のチャンスをうかがってついに実行に移しました
うかがう	伺う	v5u, vi	to ask, to inquire, to hear, to be told,to implore (a god for an oracle), to seek direction (from your superior),to visit,to speak to (a large crowd at a theatre, etc.)	But BARRET and you were captured by Heidegger…	７日間、救出のチャンスをうかがってついに実行に移しました
につまる	煮詰まる	v5r, vi	to be boiled down,to come to a standstill, to reach an impasse,to approach a conclusion (of a discussion, investigation, etc.)	It must've been…ugh…terrible…	CLOUD……につまってんの？
しょるい	書類	n	document, official papers	Uh, a, anywhere's fine…I don't care. Just hurry up and land this thing.	CLOUD……この書類にサインして
ばらす		v5s, vt	to expose, to lay open (e.g. secret),to take to pieces,to kill, to murder	I'm the same way, so I can't say too much.	クソッ……作戦失敗。あとでRED XIII、からかって……ウサばらし、しちゃお
いり	入り	n, n-suf	entering,setting (of the sun),containing, content, audience,income,beginning	So, please…just leave me alone.	……よくわかるよ、YUFFIE。俺の乗り物酔いもスジガネ入りだ
のっとる	則る	v5r, vi	to conform to, to be in accordance with, to follow (rule, tradition, example, etc.)	Oh…	ね、なんとか酔わない方法ってないのかな？
うごきまわる	動き回る	v5r	to move around	But you can't always be nervous.	こういう広い場所がある乗り物では動き回るのが良い方法だ
きどる	気取る	v5r, vt	to affect, to put on airs,to act like (something one isn't), to pretend to be	If only CLOUD was here, everything would be fine.	いつもそうしていたみたいにちょっと気取ったポーズで言ってくれるの
やたら	矢鱈	adj-na	indiscriminately, blindly, at random, recklessly, thoughtlessly, excessively, profusely,indiscriminate, random, excessive	I gotta admit he was a strange dude.	やたら物知りなヤツだと思えばあたりまえのことも知らない
はなしかた	話し方	n	way of talking, speaking style	Just when you thought he was cool, he'd do some damn fool thing.	動き方も話し方もなんかチグハグなんだよな
ちぐはぐ		adj-na, n	mismatched, odd, irregular,inconsistent, incoherent, confused	Just when you thought he was cool, he'd do some damn fool thing.	動き方も話し方もなんかチグハグなんだよな
ひとっとび	ひとっ飛び	n	one jump, one flight,(at) once, (in) one stroke	Well, as long as you stay alive, you just might see him again someday. So cheer up, sis.	ツンツン頭のい場所さえわかればこのハイウインドでひとっ飛びよ
すれすれ	擦れ擦れ	adj-na, n	grazing, skimming, almost touching, passing within inches, being within a whisker, shaving close,barely, just, narrowly, by a slim margin	Buried in the depths of the underground…	そのライフストリームが海底スレスレを通っていてときどき地上に吹き出す
でく	木偶	n	wooden figure, wooden doll, puppet,blockhead, good-for-nothing, fool	Maybe, just maybe CLOUD's…	あわわわわ！話しかけないでくださいっ！
ぬすみぎき	盗み聞き	n, vs	eavesdropping, tapping	An' don' go tellin' us to wait for CLOUD to get better.	盗み聞きでも、しましょか
ふたつ	不達	n	nondelivery	Yeah… I've already told you I was.	さて……我々はふたつの課題を抱えている
かだい	課題	n	subject, theme, issue, matter,homework, assignment,task, challenge, problem, question	Yeah… I've already told you I was.	さて……我々はふたつの課題を抱えている
ぶつける	打付ける	v1, vt	to hit (e.g. one's head), to strike, to crash into,to throw (e.g. a ball, a question, a demand),to express, to vent (e.g. one's anger)	1 Destroy Meteor. 2 Remove the barrier around North Cave and defeat Sephiroth.	メテオにぶつける？我々の技術で可能なのか？
どうぜん	同然	adj-na, n, adj-no	similar to, same, right, proper, just, natural	Any ideas?	ガハハハハハ！すでに最初の課題はクリアも同然！
あっしゅく	圧縮	n, vs	compression, condensation, constriction, compaction	Meteor will soon be smashed to bits!	ヒュージマテリアは魔晄炉内で圧縮されて生成される高度に集積された特別なマテリア
しゅうせき	集積	n, vs	accumulation	Meteor will soon be smashed to bits!	ヒュージマテリアは魔晄炉内で圧縮されて生成される高度に集積された特別なマテリア
ひきだす	引き出す	v5s, vt	to pull out, to take out, to draw out, to withdraw	The plan is already in motion. We are collecting Huge Materia from each region.	そこから引き出されるエネルギーは通常のマテリアの３３０超倍！
いちどう	一同	n, n-suf	all present, all concerned, all of us	Heidegger	そのヒュージマテリアを一同に集めてメテオにぶつけるの
いわば	言わば	adv	so to speak, so to call it, as it were	I see… CLOUD has…	ライフストリームはいわば精神エネルギーのかたまり